# cmsc452; 01.28.2025

## Syllabus

What you need for this class?

-  Discrete math, modular arithmetic, algorithms, misc. math.
- Mathematical maturity.
- Short proofs.
- Short programming projects.

How to get the most out of class?

- Read the slides before class.
- Lectures are recorded; rewatch.

**Breakdown:**

- **Homework: 25%**
  - Most weeks, due Tuesday before class begins.
  - Technically due Thursday with no penalty.
- **Midterm: 20%**
  - One sheet of notes allowed!
- **Final: 35%**
  - One sheet of notes allowed!
- **Programming Project: 20%**
- **Optional Project:**
  - If you get a D in the class and well in this project, then bumped up to a C-.

**Textbook:** *Introduction to The Theory of Computation* by Michael Sipser.

- Not really required but maybe a good reference.
- Notation may differ from Bill's.

## Introduction

**Key Question:** Given a problem, *classify* how hard it is.

- Permeates all branches of mathematics and computer science.

History:

- **600 BC-1840 AD:**

  - How hard is it to express $\sqrt{2}$ as a fraction of natural numbers? 

    - *Impossible!* Proven by Pythagorean school in ~600 BC.

    - How hard is it to solve a quintic by expressing its roots as a formula?
      - *Impossible!*

    - How hard is it to trisect an angle with a ruler and a compass?
      - *Impossible!*

  - There was an awareness of computational problems taking an amount of time, but it was not rigorous.
    - Gauss invented the Fast Fourier Transform but never told anyone, because he didn't think it was that important.

- **1840 AD-1940 AD:**

  - Given a real, we want to know how hard it is in terms of the lowest degree polynomial over $\mathbb{Z}$ that it is a root of.
    - TODO.

- **1940 AD-:** Age of computers.

  - Searching a sorted list of $n$ elements: $\lg n + \Theta(1)$ computations.
    - Sorting a list: $\Theta(n \log n)$ computations as a lower bound. *Comparison-based sorting.*

  - $\set{a^n b^n : n \in \mathbb{N}}$ is not regular.

  - $\set{a^n b^n c^n : n \in \mathbb{N}}$ is not context-free.

  - SAT and similar problems are not in P (Cook-Levin). 

- **Regular Languages:**

  - Recognized in $O(1)$ space, linear time, and only one pass through the input string.

  - 3 different definitions: DFA, NFA, Regex.

  - Regular languages have many closure properties.

  - We will prove some sets are *not regular*.

- **CFGs and CSGs:**

  - Context Free and Context Sensitive Grammars.

  - We will study them *briefly*.

- **P and NP:**

  - P is the set of problems we can do in polynomial time.
    - We think of these problems as being *easy*.

  - NP-complete problems we think of as being hard, though this remains unproven.

  - We will show SAT is NP-complete; using this, we'll show many others problems are NP-complete.

- **Decidability:** DEC is the set of sets that can be decided. We don't care how long it takes!

## Deterministic Finite Automata

Conventions:

- **Start state** is one that has a line going into it from nowhere.
- Double-bordered circles are **acceptance states**.
- If a **dead or garbage state**, the string cannot be accepted by the language represented by the DFA.

## Modular Arithmetic

Assume mod $26$ for the following. 

For addition, you can *wrap around*.
$$
20 + 10 \equiv 30 \equiv 4 \mod 26
$$
For multiplication, you can also wrap around.
$$
20 \times 10 \equiv 200 \equiv 18 \mod 26
$$
Division: $\frac{1}{y}$ is the number such that $y \times \frac{1}{y} \equiv 1$.

Find $\frac{1}{3} \equiv x$, where $0 \leq x \leq 25$.

- Answer is $9$ because $9 \times 3 = 27 \equiv 1$.

Find $\frac{1}{2} = x$ where $0 \leq x \leq 25$.

- No such $x$ exists.

A number $y$ has an inverse mod $26$ if $y$ and $26$ have no common factors. Numbers that have an inverse mod $26$.
$$
\set{1,3,5,7,9,11,15,17,19,21,23,25}
$$

## DFA/DFA-Classifier Syntax

Take the following language:
$$
\set{w: \#_a(w) \equiv 1 (\text{mod } 2) \and \#_b(w) \equiv 2 (\text{mod } 3)}
$$
What is this saying?

- The number of $a$'s in the string mod $2$ must be $1$.
  - In other words, must be odd number of $a$'s.
- The number of $b$'s in the string mod $3$ must be $2$.

A DFA-classifier does not accept or reject, it classifies. 
$$
((\#_a(w) (\text{mod } 2), \#_b(w) (\text{mod } 3))
$$

## Alphabets and Strings

An **alphabet** $\Sigma$ is a set of letters (characters).

A **string** or **word** is a sequence of symbols from an alphabet $\Sigma$.

- $\Sigma^2 = \Sigma \Sigma$ is a sequence of two letters, each from $\Sigma$.
- $\Sigma^i$ is a sequence of $i$ letters, each from $\Sigma$.
- $\Sigma^0 = \set{e}$, a set of just the empty string.
- Kleene star: $\Sigma^{*}$ is .

A **language** over an alphabet is a subset of $\Sigma^{*}$.

- Let $M$ be a machine that accepts (or rejects) words.
- Then the language $L(M) = \set{w: M \text{ accepts } w}$.

A **DFA** is a $5$-tuple $(Q, \Sigma, \delta, s, F)$ where:

1. $Q$ is a finite set of **states**.
2. $\Sigma$ is a finite **alphabet**.
3. $\delta : Q \times \Sigma \rightarrow Q$ is the **transition function**.
4. $s \in Q$ is the **start state**.
5. $F \sube Q$ is the set of **final states**.

DFA $M$ *accepts* a string $w$ if it ends up at a final state when $w$ is run on $M$.

A language $L$ is **regular** if there exists a DFA $M$ such that:

- $L(M) = L$.

## Implementations of DFAs

Automata are essentially graphs.

- Diagrams are good for people.
- Transition tables are good for algorithmic representations.
  - Adjacency matrix!