# math475 / 01.24

## Permutations

A **permutation** of an $n$-element set is an arrangement of the elements in a specific order. A **$k$-permutation** is an arrangement of $k$ elements of the set.

The total $k$-permutations of an $n$-element set can be expressed as:
$$
P(n, k) = \frac{n!}{(n - k)!} = n(n - 1)...(n-k+1)
$$

### Total $3$-tuples $(x, y, z)$ of $\set{1, 2, 3, ..., 10}$.

$x$ has $10$ options, $y$ has $9$, and $z$ has $8$. 

So $P(10, 3) = (10)(9)(8) = 720$.

## Falling factorials.

**CATCHUP**

## Permutations with repetition.

### Total rearrangements of $AAAABBCD$.

Let's try subscripting the $A$'s to distinguish: $A_1A_2A_3A_4BBCD$. If the $A$'s were distinct, this would be easily $8! = 40320$. 

But they are not. $A_1A_2A_3A_4BBCD$ and $A_2A_1A_4A_3BBCD$ are the same case here. The $A$'s themselves can be rearranged in $4! = 24$ ways. But we only want this arrangement counted once.

Similarly, the two $B$'s can be rearranged in $2! = 2$ ways.

### Theorem for repetition.

Suppose object $1$ occurs $a_1$ times, ... object $k$ occurs $a_k$ times, where $a_1 + ... + a_k = n$. Then, the total # of rearrangements can be expressed as:
$$
\frac{n!}{(a_1!)(...)(a_k!)}
$$
The above expression is called the **multinomial coefficient**.

## Combinations.

A **combination** is the total # of ways to form a $k$-length subset of a set $n$, a combination is denoted as follows:
$$
_nC_k = \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!} = n \text{ choose } k
$$

### Of $5$ cats, $5$ dogs, and $4$ mice, $3$ are chosen. 

#### How many ways can we get $2$ cats and $1$ dog?

**Cats:** $5$ cats choose $2$, $(_5C_2)$.

**Dogs:** $5$ dogs choose $1$, $(_5C_1)$

We want these both to happen, so the answer is $(_5C_2)(_5C_1)$.

#### How many ways can we get at least $1$ cat?

**Think:** Total combinations $-$ all combinations with no cats.

Total combinations = $_{14}C_3$.

All combinations with no cats = $_{9}C_3$.

So final answer is $_{14}C_3 - {_{9}C_3}$.

## Binomial theorem.

### Defining the theorem.

The theorem below holds for any positive integer $n$.
$$
(x + y)^n = \sum_{k = 0}^{n} (_nC_k)x^ky^{n-k}
$$
Fun but pretty obvious note, the formula $(a + b)^2 = a^2 + 2ab + b^2$ can be directly derived from the above theorem. 

### Proving it.

Note the following (pretty obvious).
$$
(x + y)^n = (x + y)(x + y)(...)(x + y) \\ 
\text{multiplied $n$ times}
$$
Consider that the expansion of this expression would consist of multiplying all combinations of $x$ and $y$ from each binomial, and summing the resulting products of each combination.

Say we choose only $x$ terms from each binomial. This implies that we **choose zero $y$ terms**. The resultant term in the expansion would be $(_nC_0)x^ny^0$. Next, let's choose only $x$ terms from each binomial except for one. From that binomial, we will **choose one $y$ term**. The resultant term in the expansion would be $(_nC_1)x^{n-1}y^1$

To generalize this idea of "choosing" terms, let us choose $x$ terms from $k$ of the binomials, assuming that $k < n$. This implies that will **choose $y$ terms from $n - k$** binomials. The generalized resultant term would be $(_nC_k)x^ky^{n-k}$.

To calculate the expansion of the entire expression, we would need to calculate and sum the products of every combination of $x$ and $y$ that can be chosen from each binomial.

Note that $k$ (the # of times $x$ is chosen) can range between $0$ and $n$, inclusive. For each of these choices, $y$ must be chosen a total of $n - k$ times, so that $n$ terms are chosen in total (one from each binomial). With this in mind, we can express the summation of the combination products as such:
$$
\sum_{k = 0}^{n}(_nC_k)x^ny^{n-k}
$$

## Multinomial theorem.

**CATCHUP** wtf.
