# math475 / 01.29

## counting in two ways, continued.

**Show** that $\sum_{i = 1}^{n} i(n-i+1) = \binom{n + 2}{3}$.

- **RHS:** total of $3$-size subsets from $[n + 2] = \{1, 2, ... n + 2\}$.

  **LHS:** Consider $\{a, b, c\}$.

  Assume $a < b < c$, as sets have no order so each combination appears once. We partition the $3$-size subsets depending on the value of $b = i + 1$ (meaning $\max b = n + 1$.)

  This means there are $i$ choices for $a$ and $n + 2 - (i + 1)$ choices for $c$.

  The total $3$-size subsets of $[n+2]$ is then $\sum_{i = 1}^{n} i(n-i+1)$. $\blacksquare$​

## pigeonhole principle.

**Theorem:** If $n + 1$ pigeons are placed in $n$ pigeonholes, then there exists at least one pigeonhole with $2$ pigeonholes.

More generally, if $n$ pigeons are placed in $k$ pigeonholes, at least $1$ pigeonhole contains more than $\text{floor}(\frac{n-1}{k})$ pigeons (or $\text{ceil}(\frac{n}{k})$​​ pigeons).

**Prove** that in a group of $40$ people, at least $4$ people have a birthday in the same month.

- By the PHP (pigeonhole principle), there is at least $1$ month (pigeonhole) containing at least $\text{ceil}(\frac{40}{12}) = 4$​ people with the same birthday. $\blacksquare$

**Prove** that if $6$ different numbers are chosen from $[9] = \{1, 2, 3, ..., 9\}$, then two of the numbers will sum to $10$.

- Ways to sum to $10$: $\{1, 9\}$, $\{2, 8\}$, $\{3, 7\}$, $\{4, 6\}$.

  Let the $6$ chosen values be the pigeons and let the pigeonholes be $\{1, 9\}$, $\{2, 8\}$, $\{3, 7\}$, $\{4, 6\}$, and $\{5\}$.

  With $6$ numbers and $5$ pigeonholes, by the PHP, there exists $2$ numbers in the same pigeonhole that sum to $10$. $\blacksquare$

An athlete works out in blocks of hours. He plans to work out $45$ hours in a $30$-day month. Assume he works out at least $1$ hour a day. **Prove** there is a period of consecutive days where the cumulative hours he has worked out is exactly $14$ hours. 

- Let $a_i$ be the accumulated hours up to day $i$. 

  We know that sequence $a_1, a_2, ... a_{30} = 45$​. Since he works out at least $1$ hour a day, all values in the sequence must be distinct.

  Consider the sequence $b$ where $b_i = a_i + 14$ up to $b_{30} = a_{30} + 14 = 59$. Note that $b_i$​'s are all distinct.

  $a_i$'s and $b_i$​'s are distinct among themselves.

  In total, we have $60$ possible sequence values $a_1, ..., a_{30}$ and $b_1, ..., b_{30}$ (pigeons), and $59$ possible values (pigeonholes) they can take on. 

  By the $PHP$, there exists at least $2$ sequence values taking on the same number. 

  Since $a_i$'s and $b_i$'s are distinct among themselves, $a_j = b_k = a_j + 14$. Therefore, he worked out exactly $14$ hours between days $k$ and $j$. $\blacksquare$

## compositions and set partitions.

Let $a_1, ..., a_k$ be non-negative integers such that $\sum_{i = 1}^{k} = n$. The ordered $k$-tuple $(a_1, ..., a_k)$ is a **weak composition** of $n$ into $k$ parts.

- Note that the tuple is ordered; $2 + 3 + 5$ is different from $5 + 3 + 2$.

**Theorem (stars and bars):** The total number of weak compositions of $n$ into $k$ parts is $\binom{n + k -1}{k - 1}$.

**Find** the total ways to distribute $\$100$​ to $3$​ people in whole dollar amounts. 

- Non-negative integers $x_1 + x_2 + x_3 = 100$.
- **Answer:** $\binom{100 + 3 - 1}{3 - 1}$​ ways.
  - $n = 100$, $k = 3$. 