# math475 / 01.31

## compositions.

**Theorem (stars and bars, again):** The total number of weak compositions of $n$​ into $k$​ parts is $\binom{n + k -1}{k - 1}$​.

There are $5$ cans of Coke, $5$ cans of Pepsi, and $6$ cans of Sprite. **Find** the total ways to get $4$ cans of soda.

- Throw $4$ balls into $3$ bins. Let $x_1, x_2, x_3$ be the # of Cokes, Pepsis, and Sprite, respectively. Note $x_1 + x_2 + x_3 = 4$.
- We want to find the total weak compositions ($n = 4$, $k = 3$).
- **Answer:** $\binom{4 + 3 - 1}{3 - 1}$ ways.

What if we require $a_1, a_2, a_3, ... \geq 1$? First we "put one ball in each box" and then apply the weak composition formula.

**Theorem:** The total $k$-tuples $(a_1, ..., a_k)$ such that $\sum_{i = 1}^{k} a_i = n$, where $a_i$'s are positive integers, is $\binom{(n - k) + k - 1}{k - 1} = \binom{n - 1}{k -1}$​. This is called a **composition**.

## set partitions.

Let $X$ be finite, and $A_1, ..., A_K$ be non-empty subsets of $X$. A **partition** of set $X$, $\{A_1, ..., A_K\}$​ satisfies:
$$
\begin{gather*}
\cup_{i =  1}^{k} A_i = X \\
\text{and} \\
\forall (i, j) \in \set{1, 2, ..., K}, (i \neq j \Rightarrow A_i \cap A_j = \emptyset)
\end{gather*}
$$
All of the sets in a partition are **pairwise disjoint**.

A **Stirling number of the second kind**, denoted $S(n, k)$​​, is the total partitions of $[n]$​​ into exactly $K$​​ blocks. Note that $S(0, 0) = 1$​, by convention.

Clearly, if $k > n$​, then $S(n, k) = 0$​​, as we can't partition a set into more blocks than the size of the set. 

**Theorem:** $S(n, k) = S(n - 1, k - 1) + kS(n - 1, k)$.

**Proof:**

- **LHS:** All ways to partition $[n]$ into exactly $k$ blocks.

  **RHS:** We look at partitions of $[n]$ into $k$ blocks where either element $n$ is a singleton set $\{n\}$ or not.

  If it is, there are $n - 1$ elements we partition into $k - 1$ blocks, i.e. $S(n - 1, k - 1)$ ways.

  If it is NOT a singleton set, we first partition $[n - 1]$ into $k$ blocks in $S(n- 1, k)$ ways (all nonempty).

  Then we decide which block to place element $n$ in a total of $k$ ways, i.e. $kS(n - 1, k)$ ways. $\blacksquare$

  

