# math475 / 04.03

## hello.

Today is review session.

## review.

**Consider** the sequence $6, 6, 4, 4, 2, 1, 1, x$. For what values of $x$ is the reordered sequence graphical?

- **Graphical sequence** represents the degrees of vertices in a graph.
- $x$ can't be odd, as that would lead to an odd number of odd degree vertices.
- It also can't have a degree $\geq 8$, as there are only $8$ vertices in total.
- This leaves the possibilities of $x \in \{2, 4, 6\}$​.
- For exam: assume no loops, simple graph.
- **I get this.**

**Why** is there no bipartite graph with degree sequence $6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 5, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3$?

- Eight $6$s, Five $3$s, One $5$.
- Total edges: $[6(8) + 3(5) + 5]/2 = 34$.
- Since there are eight $6$s, we can say that one partite set must have four $6$​s at least.
  - There's a total of $8$, and they have to be distributed into two sets somehow.
  - Note we can only have four of five $6$s in this set, as six $6$s contribute $36$ edges.
  - If there are exactly four $6$s, one set has $24$ edges and the remaining vertices cannot contribute exactly $10$ more edges: $3(5) + 5 + 6(4) = 44 \neq 10$.
  - If there are exactly five $6$s, one set has $30$ edges and the remaining vertices cannot contribute exactly $4$​​​ more edges.
- **I don't get this.**

**Determine** the OGF that would count the total ways to partition integer $n$ so that if a part occurs, it occurs at least $6$ times.

- $(1 + x^6 + x^7 + \dots)(1 + x^{12} + x^{14} + \dots)(1 + x^{18} + x^{21} + \dots)(\dots)$
- **I don't get this.**

**Suppose** in a graph $G$ of order $n$, $\deg u + \deg v \geq n - 1$ for any vertices $u, v$ in $G$. Prove $G$ is connected.

- Order is the number of vertices. **Connected** means there is a walk between any two vertices. 
- We want to pick any two vertices and show that a walk exists.
- Let $w, z \in V(G)$. If $w$ and $z$ are connected by an edge, then we are done.
- Otherwise, with $n - 2$ other vertices but $\deg w + \deg z \geq n - 1$, we know that $w$ and $z$ share at least one neighbor, say $y$.
- So, $w$ to $y$ to $z$ is a walk from $w$ to $z$. $G$​ is then connected.

**A forest** has $n$ vertices, $m$ edges, and $c$ components. Relate the three parameters. 

- "Relate the three parameters" means write one in terms of the other two.
- Let $n_i$ be the total vertices in component $i$. 
- Total edges $m = \sum_{i = 1}^{c} (n_i - 1) = \sum_{i = 1}^{c} n_i - \sum_{i = 1}^{c} 1 = n - c$.
  - A tree on $n$ vertices has $n - 1$​ edges.

**Let** $G$ be a tree of order $n$ with $K$ leaves. If there are no vertices of degree $2$, prove that $K \geq \frac{n + 2}{2}$.

- No vertices of degree $2$ implies that everything must have at least degree $3$.

- So sum of all degrees is at least $K + 3(n - K)$.

- $$
  \begin{align*}
  	\frac{K + 3(n - K)}{2} &\leq n - 1 \\
  	K + 3n - 3K &\leq 2(n - 1) \\
  	-2K + 3n &\leq 2n - 2 \\
  	-2K &\leq 2n - 3n - 2 = -n - 2 \\
  	K &\geq \frac{n + 2}{2}
  \end{align*}
  $$

**Construct** a graph where $\deg u + \deg v + \deg w \geq n - 1$ for pairwise, non-adjacent vertices, but $G$ is disconnected.

- 





