# math475 / 04.08

## hello.

:fire:fire.

## hall's theorem.

Resources to actually learn cuz idk what's going on: 

- [Matching and Hall's Theorem.pdf (mit.edu)](https://math.mit.edu/~fgotti/docs/Courses/Combinatorial Analysis/30. Matchings and Hall's Theorem/Matching and Hall's Theorem.pdf).
- [Systems of Distinct Representatives - Mathematics LibreTexts](https://math.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Combinatorics_and_Discrete_Mathematics/Combinatorics_(Morris)/04%3A_Design_Theory/16%3A_Latin_Squares/16.03%3A_Systems_of_Distinct_Representatives).

Every $k$-regular bipartite graph has a perfect matching!

**Hall's Marriage Theorem:** The collection of sets $A_1, A_2, \dots, A_n$ (that may not be distinct) has a system of distinct representatives (SDR) if there exists $n$ distinct elements $a_1, a_2, a_n$ such that $a_i \in A_i$, where $1 \leq 1 \leq n$.

For example, $A_1 = \{1, 2, 3\}, A_2 = \{1, 2, 3\}, A_3 = \{1, 4\}, A_4 = \{1, 5\}$.

- We have $1 \in A_1, 2 \in A_2, 4 \in A_3, 5 \in A_4$​, which is an SDR.

Define a bipartite graph with partite sets $A = \{A_1, A_2, \dots, A_n\}$ and $B = \{a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n\}$.

> We have $a_1 \sim A_j$ if and only if $a_i \in A_j$. By Hall's theorem, an SDR exists **if and only if** for any $k$ sets:
> $$
> | A_1 \cup A_2 \cup \dots \cup A_k | \geq k
> $$
> In other words, we have at least $k$ unique elements across all $k$ sets.

## latin squares.

An example is latin squares. Given an $n \times n$ grid and $n$ symbols, a **Latin square** is a grid where every row and column contains a unique symbol.

Take an $m \times n$ Latin rectangle, where $m \leq n$, when can it be "completed" to a Latin square using $n$ symbols? It suffices to show that we can construct an $(m + 1) \times n$ Latin rectangle.

- **Clarification:** $m$ is arbitrary, so if we know we can extend it by $1$, we must then be able to let $m = m + 1$ and extend that by $1$, until $m = n$, at which point we have a Latin square.

Define a bipartite graph with partite sets $S_1 = \{ n\text{ symbols} \}$ and $S_2 = \{ n\text{ cells in row }m+1 \}$.

> For $i \in S_1$, we have $i \sim j$ if and only if symbol $i$ can be placed in cell $j$​. 
>
> - Symbols: $A, B, C, \dots$
> - Cells: $1, 2, 3, \dots$
>
> In an $m \times n$ rectangle, for any given symbol, it has been placed in $m$ different columns. (Because every number shows up in each row, but each column has distinct symbols.) Therefore, we have $n - m$ possible positions for row $m + 1$​.
>
> Now, given any cell, there are then $n - m$ possible choices for a symbol in row $m + 1$, as there are $m$ distinct symbols used above it. 
>
> Therefore, the graph is $n - m$ regular, so a perfect matching exists, i.e. each cell in row $m + 1$ can be matched to a unique symbol! 

