# math475 / 04.10

## eulerian graphs.

A **Eulerian trail** is a walk on graph $G$ that traverses every edge exactly once, provided the start and end vertex are different.

A **Eulerian circuit** is a train that traverses every edge exactly once, provided the start and end vertex are the same.

**A Eulerian graph** is one that contains a Eulerian circuit.

**Euler's Theorem:** a connected (multi)graph has a Eulerian circuit if and only if every vertex has an even degree.

> **Proof $(\Rightarrow)$:** Given $G$ is Eulerian, if $v$ is the start vertex, the first encounter is going "OUT." But the circuit must end here, so the last encounter is "IN." As such, vertex $v$ is incident to an even number of edges. 
>
> If $v$ is not the start vertex, the first encounter is "IN" and the last encounter is "OUT." Vertex $v$ is therefore incident to an even number of edges.
>
> ---
>
> **Proof $(\Leftarrow)$:** Consider a $uv$-trail of maximum length. We claim $u = v$. If we end on $v$, the last encounter would be "IN."  Since we do not start at $v$, the first encounter must also be "IN." As such, we traversed an odd number of edges incident to $v$. By our assumption, there is at least one edge incident to $v$ not traversed, which is a contradiction. 
>
> We then know that a circuit exists, but must show that all edges are traversed. Let $C$ be a circuit of maximum length and assume $x \sim y$ is not in the circuit., with $x$ in the circuit. Consider the graph $H$ where all edges of $C$ are deleted. Then $H$ may be disconnected, but every vertex must have even degree. Consider the component containing $x \sim y$.  We take a train of maximum length starting at $x$. By earlier, this must be a circuit. 
>
> We start at $x$, traverse circuit $C$, and then this additional circuit. This creates a longer circuit, contradicting that $C$​ had max length. $\blacksquare$

**Corollary:** A graph $G$ has an Eulerian trail if and only if exactly $2$ of its vertices have odd degree. 

## hamiltonian graphs.

A cycle in a graph $G$ containing every vertex is a **Hamiltonian cycle** when the start and ending vertices are the same. 

A **Hamiltonian path** is a path that contains all the vertices. 

A **Hamiltonian graph** is one that contains a **Hamiltonian cycle**.

Let $c(G\setminus S)$ be the total number of components of connected graph $G$ after deleting vertex set $S$ and the edges incident to the vertices in $S$.

A graph is $t$-tough if $t \leq \frac{|S|}{c(G \setminus S)}$ for every $S \sube V(G)$ that disconnects $G$. 

The **toughness** of $G$:
$$
t(G) = \min \frac{S}{}
$$
