# math475 / 04.26

## exam review.

Provide examples of the following graphs on at least $4$ vertices:

- Hamiltonian and Eulerian. **Any $4$-cycle**.
- Ham, not Eul.
- Eul, not Ham.
- Not Ham nor Eul.

We say $G$ has an odd component if the component has an odd number of vertices. Suppose graph $H$ is a *connected* graph on $n$ vertices with a perfect matching. Prove for any subset $S$ of disconnecting vertices, the total odd components of $H - S$ does not exceed $|S|$​.

- "Draw out what you understand."
- **Proof:** Since $H$ has a perfect matching, there exists at least one vertex in each odd component that matches with a vertex in $S$, so the number of odd components cannot exceed the number of vertices in $S$.
- The converse of this statement holds! **Tuttes' theorem.**

The **wheel graph** $W_n$ is the graph on $n$ vertices where vertex $n$ joins to all vertices in a $C_{n - 1}$.

- Is $W_n$​ Eulerian? Hamiltonian?
  - The graph **is not** Eulerian, but it **is** Hamiltonian.
- Without proof, what is $\alpha(W_n)$​​?
  - The odd cycle. The middle vertex obviously can't work so just choose alternating elements in the outer cycle.
- What is $\chi(W_n)$​? Justify.
  - If $n$ is odd, $\chi(W_n) = 3$. We can color the $C_{n - 1}$ two colors and the middle vertex a third color. So $\chi \leq 3$. However, $W_n$ has odd cycles so it cannot be bipartite. Thus, $\chi = 3$.
  - If $n$ is even, $\chi(W_n) = 4$. The $C_{n - 1}$ needs $3$ colors, as it contains an odd cycle. We then need a fourth color for the center vertex.

Generalize Euler's identity to a disconnected graph with $k$ components. 

- Let component $C_i$ have $n_i$ vertices, $m_i$ edges, and $f_i$ faces.
- Ignoring the outer face, $n_i - m_i + f_i = 1$​.
- Summing over all components $1$ through $k$, $n - m + f = k$. 
- Now we add back the outer face that was excluded.
- We find that $n - m + f = k + 1$​.

Prove that if $G$ is $k$-critical, it must be connected.

- **Proof:** Assume that $G$ is disconnected into $c$ components. The chromatic number of $G$ must be equal to the maximum chromatic number across all $c$ components. As such, removing $c - 1$ components would keep the same chromatic number, so $G$ must not be $k$​-critical. 
- This is a contradiction, and thus $G$​ must be connected.

Given graph $G$, the line graph of $G$ denoted $L(G)$ is the graph whose vertex set is $E(G)$ and an edge set $u_i \sim u_j$ in $E(L(G))$ if and only if the corresponding edges in $G$ were incident to a common vertex. Show if $G$ is Eulerian, that $L(G)$ is also Eulerian.

- **Proof:** Let $v_i \sim v_j$ in $G$, so $\deg v_i = 2k_1, \deg v_k = 2k_2$. 

