# math475 / 05.01

## turan's theorem.

**Question:** What is the maximum number of edges on a graph with $n$ vertices that does NOT contain any triangles ($K_3$)?

**Theorem (Mantel):** If $G$ has no $K_3$, then the total edges in $G$ is at most $\text{floor}(\frac{n^2}{4})$ where $n$ is the order of $G$. Moreover, equality occurs *iff* $G \approx K_{\text{floor} \frac{n}{2}, \text{ceil} \frac{n}{2}}$.

**Question:** What about avoiding larger cliques (i.e. $K_4$, $K_5$, ...)?

**Definition:** An **$r$-partite** graph is a graph whose vertices are partitioned into $r$ independent sets, denoted $S_1, S_2, \dots, S_r$. The **complete $r$-partite graph** $K_{t_1, t_2, \dots, t_r}$ is the $r$-partite graph such that any two vertices in different partite sets have an edge. 

Consider the graph $K_{1, 3, 3}$. Clearly, this graph has no $K_4$, as a vertex in a given partite set can only connect with a vertex in one of the other two partite sets.

- Generalizing this, $K_{t_1, t_2, \dots, t_r}$ ($r$-partite) does NOT contain a $K_{r + 1}$ subgraph.  

**Definition:** The **Turan graph** $T_{n, r}$ is the complete $r$-partite graph when all partite sets have nearly the same number of vertices, either $\text{floor}(\frac{n}{r})$ or $\text{ceil}(\frac{n}{r})$​.

- The above $K_{1, 3, 3}$ is not a Turan graph, but $K_{2, 2, 3}$ is.

**Theorem (Turan's):** 

- Let $2 \leq r \leq n - 1$, and $n \geq 3$. 
- The Turan graph $T_{n,r}$ does NOT contain a $K_{r+1}$ as a subgraph. 
- If $G$ is any graph on $n$ vertices not containing a $K_{r + 1}$, the total edges in $G$ is at most $(\frac{r - 1}{2r})(n + 1)^2$. 
- Moreover, the extremal graph with the most edges is if $G \approx T_{n, r}$.

**Proof:** By induction on $n$,

- Clearly the statement holds for $n \leq r$ (not enough vertices to create $K_{r + 1}$).
- Let $G$ be on $n + 1 \geq r + 1$ vertices, and assume the statement holds for all graphs on $n$ or fewer vertices (**induction hypothesis**). 
- If $G$ has the max possible edges, it must contain a $K_r$.
- Split our vertices in sets $A$ and $B$. Let $A$ be the vertices induced by the $K_r$. It follows that $B$ must hold $n + 1 - r$ vertices. Count the edges in $G$ in three parts: $e(A, A)$, $e(B, B)$, $e(A, B)$. 
- Clearly, $e(A, A) = \binom{r}{2}$, as any two vertices in $A$ are connected.
- By the **induction hypothesis**, maximizing the edges in $B$ means it is $T_{n + 1 - r, r}$. 
- As such, $e(B, B) \leq (\frac{r - 1}{2r})(n + 1 - r)^2$.
- Now, for $e(A, B)$, each vertex in $B$ can join to at most $r - 1$ vertices in $A$, as to not create the subgraph $K_{r + 1}$. As such, we have $e(A, B) \leq (r - 1)(n + 1 - r)$.
- *(skipping addition algebra)*
- Hence, $G$ contains at most $e(A, A) + e(A, B) + e(B, B) = (\frac{r - 1}{2r})(n + 1)^2$ edges. $\blacksquare$

**Example:** Determine the max possible edges in a graph on $9$ vertices not containing a $K_5$.

- We have $n = 9, r = 5$. We have $4$ parts ($r - 1$) and want to connect all edges in different parts.
- The parts: $2 + 2 + 2 + 3 = 9$. 
- Total edges is $\binom{3}{2} (2^2) + \binom{3}{1} (3) (2)$.

**Example:** A town is circular with radius of $4$ miles. There are $18$ phones in the town. However, any $2$ phones can only communicate if they are less than $6$ miles from each other. Show that no matter where the phones are, at least $2$ phones can each transmit to $5$ other phones (may not be all distinct).

- Let $G$ be on $18$ vertices, where $v_i \sim v_j$ if and only if they are within $6$ miles of each other.
- First we claim, for any $4$ phones, at least $2$​ communicate with each other. 
- to be contd.