# cmsc330 / 01.30

## reviewing interpreters and compilers.

A **compiler** translates code written in a high-level language into a lower-level language (such as assembly, bytecode, and machine code). Code is converted ahead of time, before the program runs. 

We would then run the compiled, optimized code to get our program output.

An **interpreter** translates code line-by-line while the code runs. **CMSC330** will teach interpreters.

## functional vs. imperative.

An **imperative language** has lower levels of abstraction. State is mutable, and arguably harder to reason about. It is harder to develop robust software. In imperative programming, we command *how* to compute, but changing state in a destructive manner. While machines are good at complicated state manipulation, humans aren't the best at reasoning about it and keeping track of state changes.

A **functional language** defines computations as mathematical functions and discourages use of mutable state. It is easier to develop robust software.

For instance, the idea of **referential transparency** specifies that a function (with some parameters) can be replaced with its return value without affecting the result. Think of using a **memo** to store return values of a computationally intensive function. That technique wouldn't work if each function call had additional side effects. Functional programming guarantees that functions can't have these side effects, so all function calls could be "saved" in memos.

A few functional languages are Standard ML, **OCaml** (what we will use), Haskell, and Scala.

## features of functional langs.

Functions are **first-class** citzens. In other words, they can be parameters to other functions (higher order), return values, and be stored as data.

These languages favor **immutability**, or "assigning once."

In addition, they often have data types, pattern matching, type inference (but the language is statically typed), exceptions, and garbage collection.

## ocaml expressions.

**Expressions** are the primary building block, akin to statements in imperative languages. Every kind of expression has:

- **Syntax:** how we write it.
- **Semantics:** type checking rules and evaluation rules.

**Values** are final expressions, that cannot be evaluated any further, like `34`, or `true`. Saying `34 + 17` would not be a value, but it would be an expression. Evaluating that expression, we would get `51`, which is a value.

**Types** are how we classify expressions. It is the set of values that an expression evaluates to, such as `int`, `bool`, `string`, etc. 

An expression $e$ will have type $t$ if $e$ will always evaluate to a value of type $t$​.

**Conditional expressions**, or if-statements, look like:

```ocaml
if 7 > 42 then "hello" else "goodbye";;
```

Note that all possible outcomes of the if-else statement must have the same value. For example, the following would error because `3` and `3.0` aren't the same type:

```ocaml
if 5 > 34 then 3 else 3.0;;
```

## ocaml functions.

OCaml functions are like mathematical functions, as in they directly compute a result from provided arguments. The `rec` keyword allows us to denote whether a function is recursive or not. Take the factorial example:

```ocaml
let rec fact n =
	if n = 0 then 1
	else n * fact(n - 1)
```

Through type inference, OCaml has determined that `n`'s type must be `int`. It determines a type that satisfies the code's constraints.