# math410; 01.29.2025

## General stuff

HW1 posted; due Tuesday, Feb 4th.

## Preliminaries, cont'd

Integers, $\mathbb{Z}$, are not a field.

- No multiplicative inverse exists.
- $2 \times 0.5 = 1$, but $0.5 \notin \mathbb{Z}$.

**Positivity Axioms**

- If $x$ and $y$ are positive, then $x + y$ is positive. 
- For all $x \in \mathbb{R}$, exactly one of the following three is true:
  - $x \in \mathcal{P}$
  - $x = 0$
  - $-x \in \mathcal{P}$

**Consequences of Positivity Axioms**

- Ordering of the real numbers; inequalities.
- Can add numbers to both sides of an inequality.
- Multiplication by a negative on both sides of an inequality switches the sign.

## Chapter 1: Completeness Axiom

Completeness to be defined later in the chapter.

Definition of the **absolute value**:
$$
|x| = \begin{cases}
	x &\text{if } x \geq 0 \\
	-x &\text{else}
\end{cases}
$$
We'll use absolute value often for *distance* between two objects.

### Triangle inequality

**[Theorem] Triangle Inequality:**
$$
|a + b| \leq |a| + |b|
$$
**Proof:**

Assume $a, b \in \mathbb{R}$. WLOG, assume $a \geq b$.

**Case 1:** $a \geq b \geq 0$. (Note: $a + b \geq 0$ by positivity axiom.)

- By definition of $|x|$, $|a + b| = a + b$.
- By definition of $|x|$, $a + b = |a| + |b|$.

**Case 2:** $a \geq 0 \geq b$ and $a + b \geq 0$.

- By definition of $|x|$, $|a + b| = a + b$.
- By definition of $|x|$, $|a| = a$.
- By definition of $x$, $|b| = -b > b$.
- $|a| + |b| \geq |a + b|$.

**Case 3:** $a \geq 0 \geq b$ and $a + b < 0$.

- By definition of $|x|$, $|a + b| = -a + (-b)$.
- By definition of $x$, $|a| = a$.
- By definition of $x$, $|b| = -b$.
- $a - b \geq -a + (-b)$.
- So, $|a| + |b| \geq |a + b|$.

**Case 4:** $0 \geq a \geq b$. (Note: $a + b < 0$ by positivity axiom.)

- By definition of $|x|$, $|a + b| = -a + (-b)$.
- By definition of $x$, $|a| = -a$.
- By definition of $x$, $|b| = -b$.
- $-a + (-b) = -a + (-b)$.
- $|a| + |b| = |a + b|$.

Meow all cases pass. $\square$

---

**Case 1**: $a \geq b \geq 0$. *(Note: $a + b \geq 0$ from positivity axiom.)*

- Then, $|a + b| = a + b$, by definition of absolute value.
- $a + b = |a| + |b|$, again by definition of absolute value.

**Case 2:** $a \geq 0 \geq b$.

- **Case 2a:** $a + b \geq 0$.
  - Then $|a + b| = a + b$, by definition of $|x|$.
  - $a \geq 0 \rightarrow |a| \geq 0$.
  - $b \leq 0 \rightarrow |b| \geq 0 \rightarrow b \leq |b|$.
  - So, $a + b \leq |a| + |b|$.
- **Case 2b:** $a + b < 0$.
  - Then $|a + b| = -(a + b) = -a + (-b)$.
  - $b \leq 0 \rightarrow |b| \geq 0 \rightarrow b \leq |b|$.
  - $a \geq 0 \rightarrow |a| \geq 0$.
  - $-a \leq 0 \rightarrow -a \leq |a|$.
  - $|b| = -b$.
  - $-a + (-b) \leq |a| + |b|$.

**Case 4:** $0 \geq a \geq b$. *(Note: $a + b < 0$ from positivity axiom.)*

-  TODO: Do this myself!!

All cases are exhaustive and demonstrate the statement is true. $\square$

### Boundedness

A subset $S$ of $\mathbb{R}$ ($S \sube \mathbb{R}$) is said to be **bounded**...

- ...**above** if there exists $r \in \mathbb{R}$ such that $s \leq r$ for all $s \in S$.
- ...**below** if there exists $r \in \mathbb{R}$ such that $s \geq r$ for all $s \in S$.

Example: Let $S = [0, 1]$.

- Clearly bounded above by $2$ or like $\pi$.
  - $1$ is also an upper bound, notice the $\geq$.
  - $1$ is the *least upper bound* or the **supremum**.
- Clearly bounded below by $-50$.
  - $0$ is also a lower bound, notice the $\leq$.
  - $0$ is the *greatest lower bound* or the **infimum**.

The **supremum** of a set $S$ is denoted $\sup S$. The set $S$ has no upper bound *less than* $\sup S$.

The **infimum** of a set $S$ is denoted $\inf S$. The set $S$ has no lower bound *greater than* $\inf S$.

A set is **bounded** if it is *bounded above AND below*.

Let $S \sube \mathbb{R}$ and $|S| > 0$. If $S$ has a largest/smallest element, the element is a maximum/minimum.

| Set      | min  | inf  | max  | sup  |
| -------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| $[a,b]$  | $a$  | $a$  | $b$  | $b$  |
| $(a,b)$  | $-$  | $a$  | $-$  | $b$  |
| $[a, b)$ | $a$  | $a$  | $-$  | $b$  |
| $(a, b]$ | $-$  | $a$  | $b$  | $b$  |

**Key takeaway:** the $\sup$ and $\inf$ of $S$ do not need to be present inside set $S$.

Find the $\inf$ and $\sup$ of $(0, 1)$ and prove it.

- Clearly the $\inf$ is $0$ and $\sup$ is $1$. But how to *prove* it?

**Proof:** WLOG, let $\sup (0, 1) = 1$. 
