# math410; 01.27.2025

## Syllabus

**Textbook:** *Advanced Calculus (2nd edition)* by P. M. Fitzpatrick.

**Breakdown:**

- Homework: **10%**
  - Two lowest homework grades are dropped.
  - Assigned weekly; due the following Tuesday.
- Quizzes: **15%**
  - Lowest quiz grade is dropped.
  - Weekly every Wednesday during lecture.
- Midterm Exams: **50% (25% each)**
  - Lowest midterm is replaced with final grade, if that's higher.
- Final Exam: **25%**

## Preliminaries

**Notation:**

- $x \in A$ means $x$ is an element of set $A$.
- $x \notin A$ means $x$ is *not* an element of set $A$.
- The empty set $\set{}$ is denoted $\empty$.
- $\set{0}$ is a set with one element, zero.
- $A \sube B$ means $A$ is a **subset** of $B$. 
  - That is, all elements of $A$ are present in $B$.
- $A = B$ if $A \sube B$ and $B \sube A$.
- The set $C$ is the intersection of sets $A$ and $B$, if...
  - ...$C = A \cap B = \set{x \mid x \in A \text{ and } x \in B}$
- The set $C$ is the union of sets $A$ and $B$, if...
  - ...$C = A \cup B = \set{x \mid x \in A \text{ or } x \in B}$
- The set $C = A - B$ holds all elements in $A$ which are not in $B$.
  - Also denoted as $A \backslash B$.

**Quantifiers:**

- $\forall x \in D$ means "for all $x$ in set $D$."
- $\exists x \in D$ means "there exists some $x$ in set $D$."
- $\exists ! x \in D$ means "there exists a unique $X$ in set $D$."

**Number Sets:**

- $\mathbb{R}$: real numbers.
- $\mathbb{N}$: natural numbers, i.e. $\set{1, 2, 3, \dots}$.
- $\mathbb{Z}$: integers.
- $\mathbb{Q}$: rational numbers.
- $\mathbb{Q}^{C}$: irrational numbers.

**The Real Numbers:** 

- The set $\mathbb{R}$ satisfies three groups of axioms:
  - Field ($+$, $*$).
  - Positivity.
  - Completeness.
- For any two real numbers $x$ and $y$:
  - There exists exactly one real number, $x + y$, which is denoted the **sum** of $x$ and $y$.
  - There exists exactly one real number, $xy$, which is denoted the **product** of $x$ and $y$.

**Field Axioms:**

- Commutativity and associativity of addition and multiplication.
- Additive identity states $x + 0 = 0$.
  - Additive inverse: for all $x$ there is a $y$ such that $x + y = 0$.
- Multiplicative identity states $x * 1 = x$.
  - Multiplicative inverse: for all $x$, there is a $y$ such that $xy = 1$.
- Distributive property.
- $1 \neq 0$.

