# math410; 01.31.2025

## Chapter 1, cont'd

### Proving bounds

Find the $\inf$ and $\sup$ of $(0, 1)$ and prove it. 

**Proof:**

WLOG, let the $\sup(0, 1) = 1$. Note that $\forall x \in (0, 1), x \leq 1$. So $(0, 1)$ bounded above by $1$ by its definition.

Assume that $1$ is NOT the least upper bound (by contradiction). Assume $0 < k < 1$ is an upper bound.

But consider $\frac{k + 1}{2} < \frac{1 + 1}{2} = 1$. Also consider $\frac{k + 1}{2} > \frac{k + k}{2} = k > 0$. Rewritten,
$$
0 < \frac{k + 1}{2} < 1
$$
So, $\frac{k + 1}{2} \in (0, 1)$ but $\frac{k + 1}{2} > k$. This presents a contradiction as we have found an element in the set $(0, 1)$ greater than $k$. So $k$ must not be an upper bound by definition.

As such, $\sup (0, 1) = 1$. $\square$

Same idea for proving infinum but we contradict that $0$ isn't the greatest lower bound.

### Completeness Axiom 

**Axiom of completeness:** Suppose $S$ is a non-empty subset of $\mathbb{R}$ that is *bounded above*. Then $S$ has a *least upper bound* ($\sup S$ exists)

- In terms of $\inf$: Every non-empty subset $S$ of $\mathbb{R}$ which is *bounded below* has a greatest lower bound. ($\inf S$ exists)

*Inventing square roots!* Let $c$ be a positive number. Then, $\exists !$ positive number $x$ whose square is $c$. 

- Given $c$, $x^2 = c$ has a unique solution for $x$.
- Gives us $\sqrt{c} = x$.

**Archimedean Property (A.P.):** Suppose $\epsilon > 0$ and $c$ is an arbitrary large number.

1. $\exists n \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $c \leq \mathbb{N}$.

   **Proof:** 
   By contradiction. Assume $\exists c$ with no such $n \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $c < n$, i.e., $c \geq \forall n \in \mathbb{N}$.

   So, natural numbers are bounded above by $c$ (and $\mathbb{N}$ is nonempty).
   By *completeness axiom*, $\sup \mathbb{N}$ exists. Let $s = \sup \mathbb{N}$.

   Consider $s - 1 < s = \sup \mathbb{N}.$ As such $s - 1$ cannot be an upper bound of the natural numbers. Then, $\exists n_1$ such that $s - 1 < n_1 \rightarrow s < n_1 + 1$.

   $n_1 + 1$ must be $\in \mathbb{N}$ but is greater than $s = \sup \mathbb{N}$. This presents a contradiction. $\square$

2. $\exists m \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\frac{1}{m} \leq \epsilon$.

   Let $c = \frac{1}{\epsilon}$ and use proof of previous part.

   $\exists m \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $c < m$.

   $\frac{1}{\epsilon} < m \rightarrow \frac{1}{m} < \epsilon$. $\square$