# math410; 02.17.2025

## Sequential compactness

### Subsequence def'n

Consider a sequence $\set{a_n}$ and let the $\set{n_k}$ be a sequence of natural numbers that are *strictly increasing*. That is,
$$
n_1 < n_2 < n_3 < \dots < n_k.
$$
Then the sequence $\set{b_k}$ defined by
$$
b_k = a_{n_k}, \qquad \forall k,
$$
is a **subsequence** of $\set{a_n}$.

### Properties of subsequences

If a sequence converges, then each of its subsequences converges.

- Pretty straightforward. Show that definition of convergence for main sequence is valid for any subsequence with same $L$ and any $\epsilon$.
- The inverse is not necessarily true! Consider that $(-1)^n$ fails to converge, but the subsequence $\set{1,1,1,1,1,1,\dots} \rightarrow 1$.

More interesting: Every sequence has a monotone subsequence.

- **Proof.** Consider $\set{a_n}$. We call an index $m$ a **peak index** for $a_n$ if $a_n \leq a_m$ for all $n \geq m$.
  
  There are two cases.
  
  **Case 1:** Infinitely many peak indices in $\set{a_n}$.
  
  - In this case, we pick all our peak indices to form our subsequence. By definition, every subsequent peak index is less than or equal to the previous, so such a subsequence is monotonic decreasing, as needed.
  
  **Case 2:** Finitely many peak indices in $\set{a_n}$.
  
  - If there are finitely many peak indices, then we can find $N \in \mathbb{N}$ such that there are no peak indices greater than in. 
    
    Since $N$ is not a peak index, $\exists n_1 \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $n_1 > N$ and $a_{n_1} \geq a_N$.
    
    Since $n_1$ is not a peak index, $\exists n_2 \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $n_2 > N$ and $a_{n_2} \geq a_{n_1}$.
    
    Continue for $n_k$, $\exists n_{k+1} \in \mathbb{N}$ s.t. $n_{k + 1} > N$ and $a_{n_{k+1}} \geq a_{n_k}$.
    
    Then,
    
    $$
    a_{n_{k + 1}} \geq a_{n_k} \geq \dots a_{n_2} \geq a_{n_1},
    $$
    
    which is monotonically increasing, as needed.

Every bounded sequence has a convergent subsequence.

- **Proof:** Assume $\set{a_n}$ is bounded.
- $\set{a_n}$ must have a monotone subsequence $\set{a_{n_k}}$.
- Since $\set{a_n}$ is bounded, $\set{a_{n_k}}$ is also bounded.
  - (Absolute value of all terms $\leq$ some $M$).
- Then $\set{a_{n_k}}$ is monotone and bounded, so must converge by the Monotone Convergence Theorem.

### Compact

$S \sub \mathbb{R}$ is called **compact** (or *sequentially compact*) if every sequence in $S$ has a convergent subsequence that converges to a point in $S$.    