# math410; 02.10.2025

## Properties of convergent sequences

A sequence is **bounded** if
$$
\exist M \in \mathbb{R} \text{ s.t. } |a_n| \leq M, \forall n.
$$
*Theorem:* Every convergent sequence is *bounded.*

- **Proof:** Let $a_n \rightarrow a$ and take $\epsilon = 1$.

  By def'n of convergence, $\exists N \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\forall n \geq N$,
  $$
  |a_n - a| < \epsilon = 1.
  $$
  Then,
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  	|a_n| = |a_n - a + a| 
  		&\leq |a_n - a| + |a| \\
  		&< 1 + |a|
  \end{align*}
  $$
  $1 + |a|$ is a constant, and so we have shown that the elements of $a_n$ for $n \geq N$ are bounded. But we must still show that the elements of $a_n$ for $n < N$ are bounded.

  Consider that there are a finite number of such terms. As such, this set of terms $\set{a_1 \dots a_{n - 1}}$ must be bounded be the largest term, that is $\max \set{a_1 \dots a_{n - 1}}$.

  Now considering the entire set $\set{a_n}$, all elements must be bounded by either the bound of elements $n \geq N$, or the largest of the elements $n < N$. In particular, the larger of the two must bound all the elements in the sequence $\set{a_n}$. So $a_n \rightarrow a$ is bounded. $\square$

*Definition:* A set of numbers $\set{X_n }$ is **in a set** $S$ if $\forall n, X_n \in S$.

A set $S$ is **dense** in $\mathbb{R}$ *iff* every $x \in \mathbb{R}$ is a limit of a sequence in $S$.

- We have proven the rationals $\mathbb{Q}$ are dense in $\mathbb{R}$ in the past.

  Take $\pi$. Consider the limit of the following set of rationals:
  $$
  \set{3, 3.1, 3.14, 3.141, 3.1415, \dots} \rightarrow \pi.
  $$
  Yippee!

- **Proof ($\Rightarrow$):** Assume $S$ is dense in $\mathbb{R}$. Fix $x \in \mathbb{R}$. Let $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

  Since $S$ is dense in $\mathbb{R}$, $\exists S_n \in (x, x + \frac{1}{n})$.

  Let $\set{a_n} = \set{x + \frac{1}{n}}$. We will show that $a_n \rightarrow x$.

  Let $\epsilon > 0$ be given. 

  By A.P., $\exists N \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\frac{1}{\epsilon} < N$. Rearranging, $\frac{1}{N} < \epsilon$.

  Then $\forall n \geq N$,
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  	|a_n - L| 
  		&= |a_n - x| \\
  		&= \left| x + \frac{1}{n} - x \right| \\
  		&= \left| \frac{1}{n} \right| \\
  		&= \frac{1}{n} \leq \frac{1}{N} < \epsilon,
  \end{align*}
  $$
  as needed. We have found a sequence in $S$ which has a limit of $x$ in $\mathbb{R}$. $\square$

- **Proof ($\Leftarrow$):** 