# cmsc401; 01.28.2025

## Syllabus

Overview:

- Fundamental **geometric primitives and algorithms** for geospatial data processing and analysis.
- Algorithms and data structures for representing, processing, and analyzing **point data**.
- Application to *LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)* data.
  - Terrain reconstruction, urban modeling, forest management, and coastal data management and analysis.
- **Surface and scalar field modeling:** raster and vector models, algorithms for building, querying and processing such models.

Quick data structure review:

- **Lists and arrays:** structures for encoding sequences of points, like the vertices of a polygon.
- **Binary search trees:** basis for hierarchical spatial indexes.
- **Graphs:** think use in road networks.

Topics covered:

- **Fundamental geospatial concepts:** Objects (points, lines, regions), maps, fields (terrains), networks.
- **Basic geometric primitives:** intersections of two line segments, position of a point with respect to an oriented line, etc.
- **Geometric algorithms:** Point-in-polygon, line segment intersections, convex hull.
- **Processing and analysis of point data:**
  - Grids.
  - Spatial indexes: quad-trees and KD-trees.
  - Voronoi diagrams.
  - Algorithms for point location, nearest neighbor, range searching.
- **Unsupervised learning algorithms:** point clustering.
- **Triangulated irregular networks (TINs):** data structures.
- **LiDAR data processing:**
  - Terrain reconstruction.
  - Rooftop reconstruction in urban environments.
  - Tree mapping and reconstruction in forest management.
  - Bathymetry reconstruction in coastal data processing in analysis.

Course breakdown:

- Homework: **45%**
  - Two reading assignments.
  - Two programming assignments.
- Project: **25%**
- Final: **30%**

## Basic Geometric Entities

### Points

We say a **point** is a coordinate pair in Euclidean space: $(x, y)$.

Compare two points $p_0 = (x_0, y_0)$ and $p_1 = (x_1, y_1)$:

- $p_1 = p_0$ if and only if $x_1 = x_0$ and $y_1 = y_0$.
- Otherwise, $p_1 \neq p_0$.

Euclidean distance between $p_1$ and $p_0$:
$$
\sqrt{(x_1 - x_0)^2 + (y_1 - y_0)^2}
$$

### Straight-line segments

A **segment** is a bounded portion of a straight line located between two points $p_0 = (x_0, y_0)$ and $p_1 = (x_1, y_1)$.

The equation of the **straight line** between $p_0 = (x_0, y_0)$ and $p_1 = (x_1, y_1)$:
$$
(y - y_0)(x_1 - x_0) - (x - x_0)(y_1 - y_0) = 0
$$
Basic **point-in-segment** query: return *true* if point $Q$ lies on segment $s$ defined by points $p_0$ and $p_1$, otherwise return *false*. Two conditions:

- It must satisfy the straight line equation of $p_1$ and $p_2$.
- And must be bounded by the rectangle whose diagonal is segment $s$.
  - Simple coordinate comparison.

### Spatial relation among three points

One of the fundamental geometric primitives.

**Problem:** Given point $A$, $B$, and $C$ in the plane, where is $C$ located with respect to the line passing through $A$ and $B$, with orientation from $A$ to $B$?

Possible answers:

- $C$ is on the right of $AB$.
- $C$ is on the left of $AB$. 
- $C$ is aligned with $AB$.

$$
(y_C - y_A)(x_B - x_A) - (x_C - x_A)(y_B - y_A) = 0
$$

Consider the above:

- If $> 0$, then a *left turn*.
- If $= 0$, then *aligned*.
- If $< 0$, then a *right turn*,

How to account for **floating-point precision error**?

- We can set a threshold $t$ that is slightly $> 0$. Then if the above value $< t$, we consider $C$ to be on the line.
- Infinite arithmetic precision: complex and very slow.

