# cmsc401; 01.30.2025

## Basic entities, cont'd

### Polylines and polygons

A **polyline** is a chain of segments ("straight line segments") defined by a sequence of distinct points, called *vertices*.

The polyline defined by $P_0, P_1, \dots, P_n$ has the following segments:
$$
P_0 P_1, P_1 P_2, \dots, P_{n - 1} P_n
$$
A polyline is *simple* if the segments forming it do not intersect except at the shared extreme vertices of two consecutive segments.

A **polygon** is a closed polyline, such that each vertex is the extreme vertex of exactly two segments.

- Only care about simple polygons.

A **simple polygon** implies the plane into two parts:

- **Interior** is what it surrounds; limited region.
- **Exterior** is the unlimited surrounding region.

### Sets and regions

**Open set** does not contain its boundary.

A **simply connected polygonal region** is a simple polygon and its interior.

A **multiply connected polygonal region** is defined as a set of two or more disjoint polygons such that:

1. A polygon contains all the others. (External boundary of the region.)
2. None of the other polygons contains a polygon. (Internal boundaries.)

Usually, a polygon is oriented in counterclockwise order.

- For a multiply connected region, external boundary is in counterclockwise order.
- Internal boundaries are in clockwise order.

**Convex polygons:**

- A set $S$ of points in the plane is *convex* if the straight line connecting any pair of points in $S$ is entirely contained in $S$.
- Like square or rectangle are convex for instance.
- A star is non-convex, since the line connecting points between two tips of the star would need to leave the star.

## Point-in-polygon algorithm

**Point-in-polygon:** basic geometric operation on polygonal regions.

Let $PL$ be a simple polygon and $P$ be a point in the plane.

- Find the position of $P$ with respect to $PL$.

Possible outcomes:

- $P$ is in the interior of $PL$,
- $P$ is in the exterior of $PL$, or
- $P$ is *on* $PL$.

The general solution is based on **Jordan theorem**.

Consider a half-line (ray) $L$ with origin in $P$ and consider the crossings of $L$ with polygon $PL$. Every time $L$ crosses the polygon $PL$, it will either:

- Enter the interior region of $PL$.
- Exit from the interior and enter the exterior of $PL$.

General idea of the algorithm:

- Count the $\#$ of intersections $k$ between $L$ and $PL$.
- If $n$ is even, $P$ is outside $PL$.
- If $n$ is odd, $P$ is inside $PL$.

*Intersection at a vertex.* Notice that we will find the intersection at a vertex always twice. (One for each of the two edges which share the vertex.) If an intersection corresponds to a polygon vertex $V$, we count it as:

- $1$, if $V$ is the lowest vertex (lowest $y$-value) of the edge.
- $0$, if $V$ is the highest vertex (largest $y$-value) of the edge.

*Intersection along an edge.* If $L$ runs along one of the edges of $PL$, we count it as:

- $0$, if the $y$-value of the adjacent two vertices of both neighboring edges are greater than the $y$-values of the edge's vertices.
- $1$, if that is untrue.



