# cmsc451; 01.28.2025

I wasn't here this is just off the website notes.

## Introduction

### Overview

An **algorithm** is an well-defined computational procedure that takes in values as *input* and produces some values as *output*.

Why study *algorithm design*?

- Often the first step to in software development for tricky, often combinatorial problems.
- General techniques: DP, greedy, divide-and-conquer, etc.

**Course overview:**

1. Review of asymptotics, summations, recurrences.
2. Common algorithm design techniques (such as those listed previously).
3. Intractability and NP-hard problems (and their approximate solutions).

### Describing algorithms

We will need to do three things when presenting an algorithm.

**Present the algorithm:** Clear English, non-technical description of what the algorithm does.

**Prove its correctness:** An informal that the algorithm outputs what it is designed to, i.e., it is *correct*.

**Analyze its efficiency:** Present a worst-case complexity analysis, usually of time but if space is an issue then space as well. 

- Sometimes this is obvious; other times not as much. 
- Try to reason based on algorithms you have already seen.

### Course topics

In order:

1. **Intro:** Review algorithm design and analysis. Review basic graph theory and representations.
2. **Graphs:** DFS and BFS, topological sorting, strong components, shortest paths.
3. **Greedy:** Intervals, scheduling to minimize lateness, greedy graph algorithms.
4. **DP:** Weighted intervals, longest common subsequences, chain matrix multiplication, all-pairs shortest paths in graphs.
5. **Network flow:** bipartite matching, circulations and applications. 
6. **NP-Hardness, Intractability:** Polynomial-time reductions, definitions, NP-complete problems.
7. **Approximation:** greedy and polynomial-time approximation  schemes.