# math462; 01.27.2025

## Syllabus

**Textbook:** *Partial Differential Equations: An Introduction*, by Strauss.

**Breakdown:**

- Homework: **25%**
- Three midterms: **45% (15% each)**
- Final exam: **30%**

## 1; Where do PDEs come from?

### 1.1; What is a partial differential equation?

A **differential equation** is an equation that involves derivatives.

**MATH246:**

- Study of *ordinary differential equations* (ODE).
- Difference from PDEs is single vs. multivariable equations.
- Unknown $u(x)$ of single variable $x$ involving derivatives.
- Goal is to find expressions for $u$; often multiple.

Examples of ODEs:

- $u'(x) = 2u(x)$
  - Or simply, $u' = 2u$.
  - **Solution:** $u(x) = e^{2x + C}$, where $C$ is a constant.
- $u'' + u = 0$.
  - **Solution:** $u(x) = C_1 \sin x + C_2 \cos x$ where $C_1$ and $C_2$ are constants.
- $u' + xu = 0$
  - **Solution:** $u(x) = C e^{-\frac{x^2}{2}}$.

**MATH462:**

- We will consider *multivariable functions*.

A **partial differential equation** is an equation involving the *partial derivatives* of some unknown multivariable function, which we intend to solve for.

- Significantly harder than ODEs. :pensive:

Examples of PDEs:

- $u_x + u_y = 0$.
- $u_x + y u_y = 0$.
- $u_x + u u_y = 0$.

Famous PDEs:

- **Laplace's Equation:** $u_{xx} + u_{yy} = 0$.
- **Diffusion/Heat Equation:** $u_t = k u_{xx}$, where $k$ is a constant.
  - Heat a metal rod and the heat spreads non-uniformly.
  - $u(x, t)$ represents the temperature of the rod,
    - at position $x$ and time $t$.
- **Wave Equation:** $u_{tt} = C^2 u_{xx}$, where $C$ is a constant.
  - $u(x, t)$ is the vertical displacement of a vibrating string,
    - at position $x$ and time $t$.

For $u(x, y)$, the **Laplacian** $\Delta u = u_{xx} + u_{yy}$.

- For $u(x, y, z)$, $\Delta u = u_{xx} + u_{yy} + u_{zz}$.

Clearly, the **Laplacian** of Laplace's Equation is $\Delta u = 0$.

- Refer to differential equation above.

The heat and wave equations above are *1-dimensional.*

- Time is not a dimension; not included in Laplacian.

Higher dimensions:

- **2D Diffusion Equation:** $u_t = k \Delta u$ for $u(x, y, t)$.
  - Notice the Laplacian is *spatial* and only considers dimensions, i.e., not time.
- **2D Wave Equation:** $u_{tt} = C^2 \Delta u$.
  - Scales similarly for more dimensions.

The **order** of a PDE is the highest-order derivative which appears in the equation.

- Note that $u_{xy}$ is a second-order derivative; two are taken.
- And that $u_x u_y$ is just two first-order derivatives.