# math462; 01.29.2025

## Linearity vs. Non-linearity.

### Definition

Examples of linear PDEs:

1. $u_{xy} = 0$
2. $u_x + y u_y = 0$
3. $a(x, y) u_x + b(x, y) u_y = 0$

Examples of non-linear PDEs:

1. $u_x + u u_y = 0$
2. $u_x u_y = 0$
3. $u_{tt} - u_{xx} + u^3 = 0$

To define *linearity*, we first define a *linear operator*. Examples:

1. $\frac{d}{dx}$
2. $\frac{d}{dy}$
3. $y \frac{\partial}{\partial x} - x \frac{\partial}{\partial y}$
4. The Laplacian $\Delta = \frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2}{\partial y^2}$

A **linear operator** $\mathcal{L}$ transforms functions into functions.

**Linearity** means that:

- $\mathcal{L}(u + v) = \mathcal{L}(u) + \mathcal{v}$, for all $u$ and $v$.
- $\mathcal{L}(Cu) = C \mathcal{L}(u)$ for all $u$ and constants $C$.

As an exercise, verify the example operators are linear.

- Verify, for instance, that $\Delta(u + v) = \Delta u + \Delta v$ and $\Delta (Cu) = C \Delta u$.

The operator $\mathcal{L}(u) = u_x u_y$ is **non-linear**. Why?
$$
\begin{align*}
	\mathcal{L}(u + v) 
	&= (u + v)_x (u + v)_y \\
	&= (u_x + v_x) (u_y + v_y) \\
	&= u_x u_y + v_x u_y + u_x v_y + v_x v_y
\end{align*}
$$

$$
\begin{align*}
	L(u) + L(v) &= u_x u_y + v_x v_y 
\end{align*}
$$

So, $\mathcal{L}(u + v) \neq \mathcal{L}(u) + \mathcal{L}(v) \rightarrow \mathcal{L}$ is *not linear*.

### Linear PDEs

A PDE is **linear** is it can be written in the form $\mathcal{L}(u) = g$, where $\mathcal{L}$ is a *linear operator* and $g$ is a function of the independent variables *only*.

Two flavors of linearity:

1. $\mathcal{L}(u) = 0$ is a **homogeneous linear PDE**.
2. $\mathcal{L}(u) = g; g \neq 0$ is an **inhomogeneous linear PDE**.

Examples:

- Laplace's equation $u_{xx} + u_{yy} = 0$.
  - $\Delta(u) = 0$.
  - $\Delta$ is a linear operator.
  - **Homogeneous linear PDE**.
- Heat equation $u_t = k u_{xx}$.
  - $u_t - k u_{xx} = 0$.
  - LHS is a linear operator.
  - **Homogeneous linear PDE**.
- Wave equation $u_{tt} = c^2 u_{xx}$.
  - $u_{tt} - c^2 u_{xx} = 0$
  - LHS is a linear operator.
  - **Homogeneous linear PDE**.

### Superposition Principle

For a homogeneous linear PDE $\mathcal{L}(u) = 0$, the sum $u + v$ of two solutions to the PDE, $u$ and $v$, is also a solution to the PDE. 

More generally, given solutions $u_1 \dots u_n$ and constants $c_1 \dots c_n$, all linear combinations of the following form are solutions as well:
$$
\sum_{i=1}^{n} c_i u_i
$$
The solution set of $\mathcal{L}(u) = 0$ is a vector space. (Subspace of functions.)

Example:

- We know that $u(x, y) = e^x \sin y$ and $v(x, y) = e^{-2x} \cos {2y}$ are both solutions to Laplace's equation $\Delta u = 0$.
- *Superposition principle states* that any solution of the following form is a valid solution to Laplace's equation:
  - $Ae^x \sin y + B e^{-2x} \cos{2y}$ where $A$ and $B$ are any constants.

### Inhomogeneous solution sets

Suppose $v$ and $w$ are solutions to the inhomogeneous PDE $\mathcal{L}(u) = g$ where $g \neq 0$.

- The difference of the solutions $v$ and $w$, $v - w$, is a solution of the homogeneous PDE $\mathcal{L}(u) = 0$.
- Why? $\mathcal{L}(v) - \mathcal{L}(w) = g - g = 0$.
- So $\mathcal{L}(v - w) = 0$ as a result of linearity.

For similar reasoning, if $v$ is a solution of $\mathcal{L}(u) = g$ (where $g \neq 0$) and $w$ is a solution of $\mathcal{L}(u) = 0$,

- $v + w$ is a solution of $\mathcal{L}(u) = g$.

Generalizing this further,

- The *entire solution set* of $\mathcal{L}(u) = g$ (again, $g \neq 0$) can be found by adding *one solution* of $\mathcal{L}(u) = g$ with every solution in the set of solutions to $\mathcal{L}(u) = 0$.

### Solving some PDEs

Find all such $u(x, y)$ that satisfy the PDE $u_{xx} = 0$.
$$
\begin{align*}
	u_{xx} &= 0 \\
	\int u_{xx} dx &= \int 0 dx \\
	u_x &= C_1 \\
	\int u_x dx &= \int C_1 dx \\
	u &= C_1 x + C_2
\end{align*}
$$
Since we integrated with respect to $x$, the "constants" can depend on $y$ meaning they are really functions. So we can write the general solution as:
$$
u = f(y) x + g(y)
$$
