# math426; 01.31.2025

## Some review

For $u(x$), if $u' = 0$, then $u(x) = C$ where $C$ is a constant.

For $u(x, y)$, if $u_x = 0$, then $u(x, y) = f(y)$ where $f$ is a function that depends only on $y$ (not $x$).

- From the perspective of solely $x$, $f(y)$ is a "constant."

### Basic (separable) PDEs and solution

Find all $u(x, y)$ which satisfies the following differential equation:
$$
u_x + u = 0
$$
Rearrange and integrate with respect to $x$:
$$
\begin{align*}
	\frac{\partial u}{\partial x} &= -u \\
	\int -\frac{1}{u} du &= \int dx \\ 
	u(x, y) &= f(y) e^{-x}
\end{align*}
$$
Find all $u(x, y)$ such that $u_{xy} = 0$.

- Second-order mixed partial derivative.

First integrate with respect to $y$:
$$
u_x = f(x),
$$
where $f(x)$ is a constant with respect to $y$, but can still depend on $x$.

Let $F(x)$ be an antiderivative of $f(x)$ and integrate with respect to $x$:
$$
u = \int f(x) dx = F(x) + G(y),
$$
where $G(y)$ is a constant with respect to $x$, but can still depend on $x$.

## 1.2; First order linear PDEs

For $u(x, y)$, first order linear PDEs have the general form:
$$
a(x, y) u_x + b(x, y) u_y + c(x, y) u = d(x, y)
$$
We'll start with something much simpler (no $u$ term, homogeneous):
$$
a u_x + b u_y = 0,
$$
where both $a$ and $b$ are actually constants.

Remember that the **gradient** $\nabla f(x, y) = (f_x, f_y)$.

Recall that the **directional derivative of $f(x, y)$** in the direction of a vector $\vec v = (a,b)$ is equal to $D_{\vec v} f = \vec{\nabla} \cdot \vec v$.

So the PDE $a u_x + b u_y = 0$ can be rewritten as:
$$
D_{\vec v} u = 0, \text{where } \vec v = (a, b)
$$
Along every parallel line with the slope of $\vec v$, $u(x, y)$ must take the same value.

In the case of the PDE $au_x = 0$,

- The lines in question would be horizontal, i.e. parallel to the $x$-axis.

Each of these lines has the form $bx - ay = C$ for any constant $C$. Why?

- The slope is $\frac{b}{a}$ and the line itself can be anywhere on plane.
- So we get $y = \frac{b}{a} x + y_0$ where $y_0$ is the arbitrary constant $x$-intercept.
- This can be rearranged to the above form.

Each of these lines are called **characteristic lines**.

- Each value of $C$ in the above form corresponds to a different/unique characteristic line!

As such, the value of $u$ is some function of $C$: $u(x, y) = f(C)$.

- As we know, $C$ can be expressed as $bx - ay$.
- So $u(x, y) = f(bx - ay)$.
- $f$ is an arbitrary function of a single variable.

**Theorem:** The *general solutio*n of $a u_x + b u_y = 0$ is
$$
u(x, y) = f(bx - ay),
$$
where $f$ is an arbitrary single-variable function.

*Example:* Solve the differential equation
$$
2 u_x + 5 u_y = 0, \text{where } u(x, 0) = \sin x
$$
Recall $u(x, y) = f(bx - ay) = f(5x - 2y) $.

- When $y = 0$, $f(5x) = \sin x$.
  - $f(w) = \sin (\frac{1}{5}w)$.
- $u(x, y) = \sin(\frac{5x - 2y}{5})$ 

