# math462; 02.07.2025

## Flows, vibrations, diffusions

### Transport equation

The **transport equation** is $u_t + c u_x = 0$.

*Where does the PDE come from?* Consider a fluid flowing at a constant rate along a horizontal pipe in the positive $x$-direction.

- A substance (like pollutant or dye) is suspended in the water and is moving with the flow.
- Assume the substance is *not diffusing* (spreading).

Let $u(x, t)$ be its concentration at position $x$ at time $t$.

- If $h$ units of time pass, what was at position $x$ is now at position $x + ch$.
- So $u(x + ch, t + h) = u(x, t)$, for all $x, t, h$.

Let's derive the PDE; differentiating with respect to $h$.
$$
\begin{align*}
	u(x + ch, t + h) &= u(x, t) \\
	u_x (x + ch, t + h) (0 + c) + u_t(x + ch, t + h) (0 + 1) &= 0 
\end{align*}
$$
Plugging in $h = 0$,
$$
c u_x (x, t) + u_t (x, t) = 0
$$
Yippee! As a PDE, this is just a first-order linear; quite a simple one as the coefficients are constant (recall the $C = bx - ay$).

### 1D diffusion equation (heat equation)

The **heat equation** is $u_t = k u_{xx}$.

Suppose we have a motionless liquid in a straight horizontal pipe containing a substance (pollutant or dye) that is *diffusing* or spreading out.

Let $u(x, t)$ be the concentration (mass per unit length) at position $x$ at time $t$.

Let $a, b$ be two arbitrary points in the pipe. Let $M(t) = \int_{a}^{b} u(x, t) dx$, which is the total mass of substance between $a$ and $b$ at time $t$.

Differentiating this function with respect to $t$ tells you how the mass between points $a$ and $b$ changes over time.
$$
\begin{align*}
	\frac{dM}{dt} 
		&= \frac{d}{dt} \int_{a}^{b} u(x, t) dx \\
		&= \int_{a}^{b} \frac{\partial}{\partial d t} [u(x, t)] dx \\
        &= \int_{a}^{b} u_t(x, t) dx
\end{align*}
$$
On the other hand, **Fick's Law** states that the rate at which mass flows through a point is proportional to $u_x$ (called the concentration gradient).

As such, $\frac{dM}{dt} = \text{flow across $b$} \pm \text{flow across $a$}$.

- From Fick's Law, this is $= ku_x(b, t) \pm ku_x(a, t)$.

Consequently,
$$
\int_{a}^{b} u_t(x, t) dx = ku_x(b, t) \pm ku_x(a, t)
$$
Differentiating both sides with respect to $b$:
$$
u_t(b, t) = k u_{xx} (b, t) - 0
$$
Letting $x = b$,
$$
u_t = k u_{xx},
$$
which is our heat equation!