# math462; 02.05.2025

## Last class...

### Solving $a(x, y) u_x + b(x, y) u_y = 0$

A solution $u(x, y)$ of the PDE
$$
a(x, y) u_x + b(x, y) u_y = 0
$$
is constant along the characteristic curves $y(x)$ which satisfy 
$$
\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)}.
$$
This is a first-order ODE which we have to solve.

### Example solution

Solve the PDE $3y^2 u_x - x u_y = 0$ where $u(0, y) = e^y$.

- **Solution:**

  Rewrite the PDE: $u_x - \frac{x}{3y^2} u_y = 0$.

  So, $\frac{dy}{dx} = - \frac{x}{3y^2}$. We solve this:
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  	\int 3y^2 dy &= \int -x dx \\
  	y^3 &= -\frac{1}{2} x^2 + C \\
  	C &= \frac{1}{2} x^2 + y^3
  \end{align*}
  $$
  On a characteristic curve $y(x)$, $u(x, y(x))$ is a "constant." Depends on the specific curve you're on, defined by $C$ value. That is,
  $$
  u(x, y) = f(C) = f(\frac{1}{2} x^2 + y^3)
  $$
  for an arbitrary function $f$ of one variable. This is our general solution!

  Recall the condition $u(0, y) = e^y$.
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  	u(0, y) &= f(y^3) = e^y \\
  	f(w) &= e^{\sqrt[3]{w}}
  \end{align*}
  $$
  So our specific solution as a result of this condition becomes
  $$
  u(x, y) = e^{\sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{2} x^2 + y^3}}.
  $$

## Any first-order linear of $x$ and $y$

### Overview

For a partial differential equation of the form
$$
a(x, y) u_x + b(x, y) u_y = d(x, y),
$$
the characteristic curves are still considered to be defined by
$$
\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)}.
$$
The key difference now though is that $u(x, y)$ is NOT constant along each characteristic curve. However, there will be an ODE which describes the behavior of $u$ along each characteristic curve.

Let $y(x)$ be a characteristic curve. 

- Then let $z(x) = u(x, y(x))$. By the chain rule,
  $$
  \frac{dz}{dx} = u_x + \frac{dy}{dx} u_y = u_x + \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)} u_y
  $$
  This can be substituted into our PDE.

### Examples

*Example:* $u_x + y u_y + 2u = 0$.

- The characteristic curves are defined by $\frac{dy}{dx} = y$. Solving, we find
  $$
  y = Ce^x
  $$
  where $C$ is an arbitrary constant. Recall $z(x) = u(x, y)$ satisfies
  $$
  \frac{dz}{dx} = u_x + y u_y.
  $$
  On a characteristic $y(x)$, $u_x + y u_y + 2u = 0$ can be rewritten as
  $$
  \frac{dz}{dx} + 2z = 0,
  $$
  an ODE for $z(x)$. Solving it, we find
  $$
  z(x) = Ke^{-2x} = f(C) e^{-2x}
  $$
  On a characteristic $y(x)$, we have
  $$
  u(x, y) = u(x, Ce^x) = f(C) e^{-2x}
  $$
  To substitute out the $C$, we rewrite $C = y e^{-x}$ and get
  $$
  u(x, y) = f(y e^{-x}) e^{-2x}.
  $$

*Example:* $u_x + y u_y = xy$.

- Same characteristic curves: $y = Ce^x$.

  Let $z(x) = u(x, y(x))$. We get
  $$
  \frac{dz}{dx} = u_x + y u_y.
  $$
  Along a char. curve, the PDE is (substituting RHS of given)
  $$
  \frac{dz}{dx} = xy = x Ce^x.
  $$
  Integration by parts, 
  $$
  z = \int C x e^x dx = C xe^x - C e^x + f(C)
  $$

  - Here, $f$ is the arbitrary constant of integration, which in turn is dependent on the specific characteristic curve we are on, defined by $C$.

  Recall $C = y e^{-x}$. So the *general solution* of $u$ becomes
  $$
  u(x, y) = xy - y + f(ye^{-x}).
  $$

*Example:* $u_x + 4u_y - xu = x$.

- Characteristic curves satisfy $\frac{dy}{dx} = 4$, so
  $$
  y = 4x + C.
  $$
  Let $z(x) = u(x, y(x)) = u(x, 4x + C)$. Differentiating $z$,
  $$
  \frac{dz}{dx} = u_x + 4 u_y.
  $$
  Then, our PDE can be rewritten as
  $$
  \frac{dz}{dx} - xz = x.
  $$
  Solving,
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  	\frac{dz}{dx} &= x(z + 1) \\
  	\int \frac{1}{z + 1} dz &= \int x dx \\
  	\ln(z + 1) &= \frac{1}{2} x^2 + f(C) \\
  	z &= e^{\frac{1}{2} x^2 + f(C)} - 1
  \end{align*}
  $$
  Recall that $C = y - 4x$, so our expression for $u$ can be written as:
  $$
  u(x, y) = e^{\frac{1}{2} x^2 + f(y - 4x)} - 1
  $$
  

