# math462; 02.03.2025

## Last class review

**Theorem:** General solution of $au_x + bu_y = 0$ is:
	$u(x, y) = f(bx - ay)$, where $f(c)$ is an arbitrary function of one variable.

*Example:* Solve $5 u_x + 2 u_y = 0$, where $u(x, 0) = e^{-x^{2}}$.

- $u(x, y) = f(2x - 5y)$ where $f$ is arbitrary single-variable function.
- $f(2x) = e^{-x^2}$, so generally $f(c) = e^{-\frac{c^2}{4}}$.
- $u(x, y) = e^{-\frac{(2x - 5y)^2}{4}}$.

## More first-order linear PDEs

### Variable coefficients: $u_x + y u_y = 0$.

Recognize: LHS is the directional derivative of $u$ in direction $(1, y)$.

Describing a vector field! In this case, our characteristic curves are more complicated than straight lines. Are there curves which are always tangent to these vectors?

- If so, $u(x, y)$ is constant along each of them. 

Each of the characteristic curves are some $y$ as a function of $x$. $u$ is constant along each of these characteristic curves.
$$
\frac{d}{dx}[u(x, y(x))] = 0
$$
Applying multivariable chain rule,
$$
u_x + \frac{dy}{dx} u_y = 0
$$
Recall the PDE says $u_x + y u_y = 0$, so $\frac{dy}{dx} = y$ for both the PDE and the above derivation to hold true.

- $y = Ce^x$ for an arbitrary constant $C$.

$u(x, Ce^x)$ is constant with respect to $x$.

- Changing $C$ allows us to move between characteristic curves, changing the value of $u$. So $u(x, Ce^x) = f(C)$.

Recall $y = Ce^x \rightarrow C = y e^{-x}$. As a result, $u(x, y) = f(y e^{-x})$
	where $f$ is an arbitrary function of one variable.

### Variable coefficient examples

*Example:* Solve $u_x + y u_y = 0$ where $u(0, y) = \sin y$.
$$
\begin{align*}
	u(x, y) &= f(y e^{-x}) \\
	u(0, y) &= f(y e^0) = f(y) = \sin y \\
	f(c) &= \sin c \\
	u(x, y) &= \sin (y e^{-x})
\end{align*}
$$
*Example:* Solve prev. PDE but when $u(x, 0) = \sin x$.
$$
\begin{align*}
	u(x, y) &= f(y e^{-x}) \\
	u(x, 0) &= f(0) = \sin x
\end{align*}
$$

- Clearly, no solution. 
- $u$ needs to be constant on each characteristic function. 
- This condition claims that $u$ would vary on a characteristic function.

*Example:* Solve prev. PDE but when $u(x, 0) = 1$.
$$
\begin{align*}
	u(x, y) &= f(y e^{-x}) \\
	u(x, 0) &= f(0) = 1
\end{align*}
$$

- This is *allowed* because it doesn't contradict anything. Since there is a characteristic function on the $x$-axis and $u$ is constant along it, it's okay.
- But it is restrictive as we cannot solve the PDE further for $f(ye^{-x})$. Not enough information.

*Example:* Solve prev. PDE but when $u(x, x) = \sin x$.
$$
\begin{align*}
	u(x, x) &= f(x e^{-x}) = \sin x
\end{align*}
$$

- The line $y = x$ crosses each characteristic curve twice logically.
- At each intersection point, $u$ *should* keep the same value, but the condition given asserts that these two values would differ.
- As such, no solutions.

### Generalizing first-order linear homogeneous PDEs

Consider the general PDE:
$$
a(x, y) u_x + b(x, y) u_y = 0
$$
**Claim:** The value of $u(x, y)$ is constant along the characteristic curves which satisfy the following equation:
$$
\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)}
$$
**Why?**

- Rewrite the PDE as $u_x + \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)} u_y = 0$.
- Now if $y(x)$ is a curve that satisfies $\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)}$,
  - then $\frac{d}{dx} [u(x, y(x))] = u_x + \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)} u_y = 0$.

So the characteristic curves satisfy $\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{b(x, y)}{a(x, y)}$.
