# math462; 02.19.2025

## Domain of wave equation

**Spacetime** is the domain of $u$, represented by the graph of $u$ and $t$.

## Energy

### Derivative of integral w/partial

Before discussing *energy*, we have to address the technical issue of "differentiation under the integral sign."

Given a function $f(x, t)$, we can define

$$
I(t) = \int_a^b f(x, t) dx.
$$

Then, what is $I'(t)$? Can we just say

$$
I'(t) = \int_a^b \frac{\partial}{\partial t} f(x, t) dx?
$$

**Answer:** Not always. But usually, under *reasonable assumptions*.

- Both derivative and integral are limits. So we are basically swapping the order in which we take the limit of something. Not always valid!

**Theorem:** Let $a,b,c,d$ be constants. If both $f(x, t)$ and $\frac{\partial f}{\partial t} (x, t)$ are continuous for $(x, t)$ with $a \leq x \leq b$ and $c \leq t \leq d$, then

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_a^b f(x, t) dx 
= \int_a^b \frac{\partial}{\partial t} f(x, t) dx
\qquad (c \leq t \leq d).
$$

What about for improper integrals?

**Theorem:** Support $f(x, t)$ and $\frac{\partial f}{\partial t}$ are continuous for $-\infty < x < \infty$ and $c < t < d$. Assume that the integrals $\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} |f(x,t)| dx$ and $\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} |\frac{\partial f}{\partial t}(x, t)|$ converge and that this convergence is **uniform**. Then,

$$
\frac{d}{dt} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f(x, t) dx 
= \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{\partial}{\partial t} f(x, t) dx
\qquad (c < t < d).
$$

### Energy but actually

Let $u(x, t)$ be a solution of the wave equation $u_{tt} = c^2 u_{xx}$ for $-\infty < x < \infty$. Define the energy of the solution to be

$$
E(t) = 
    \frac{1}{2} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} u_t^2
    + c^2 u_x ^2 dx.
$$

First term is proportional to kinetic energy and second term is proportional to potential energy, so the sum becomes total energy.

Assume $\phi$ and $\psi$ vanish (are zeroed) outside of some finite interval, say $|x| > R$, which implies the integrals converge.

By causality, $u(x, t)$ vanishes when $|x| > R + ct$. Then, the same holds for $u_t$ and $u_x$. This is enough to justify using the theorem of the last section. (Differentiate $E$ with respect to $t$ using the swap of derivative and integral order.) Let's do so:

$$
\begin{align*}
    E'(t) 
        &= \frac{d}{dt} \left[\frac{1}{2} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} u_t^2 + c^2 u_x ^2 dx \right] \\
        &= \frac{1}{2} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{\partial}{ \partial t} (u_t^2 + c^2 u_x ^2) dx \\
        &= \frac{1}{2} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} 2u_t u_{tt} + c^2 (2) u_x u_{xt} dx \\
        &= \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} u_t c^2 u_{xx} + c^2 u_x u_{xt} dx \\
        &= c^2 \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{\partial}{\partial x} [u_t u_x] dx \\
        &= c^2 \lim_{A \rightarrow \infty} [u_t u_x]^{x = A}_{x = -A} \\
        &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

So we have total energy is constant, or **Conservation of Energy**.

Note that $E(t) \geq 0$. Then observe, if $E(t) = 0$ for some $t$, then $E(t) = 0$ for **all** $t$. This is a result of the conservation of energy we described. If so,

$$
\begin{align*}
    E(t) &= 0 \\
    \frac{1}{2} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} u_t^2
    + c^2 u_x ^2 dx &= 0 \\
    u_t^2
    + c^2 u_x ^2 &= 0 \\
    u_t &= 0 \\
    u_x &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

If energy is zero always, then the original wave function $u(x, t)$ is always constant.

We can use energy to directly prove that the wave equation IVP

$$
u_{tt} = c^2 u_{xx} \quad (-\infty < x < \infty), \quad u(x, 0) = \phi(x), \quad u_t(x, 0) = \psi(x)
$$

has a unique solution. Suppose $u_1$ and $u_2$ both solve this problem. Let $v = u_1 - u_2$. 

Then we check:

- $v_{tt} = c^2 v_{xx}$

- $v(x, 0) = \phi(x) - \phi(x) = 0$, which implies $v_x(x, 0) = 0$

- $v_t(x, 0) = \psi(x) - \psi(x) = 0$

Both $v_x(x, 0)$ and $v_t(x, 0)$ are $0$. Then energy $E(0) = 0$, which means $E$ is always zero due to **conservation of energy**.

-  As such, $v$ is a constant function as previously described.

- Let $v = A$.

- Since $v_x(x, 0) = 0$, $v = A = 0$.

Since $v = 0$, $u_1 = u_2$.

