# math462; 02.14.2025

## Solving wave equation

### Last class

Recall the wave equation on the real line.
$$
u_{tt} - c^2 u_{xx} = 0 \qquad (-\infty < x < \infty).
$$
From last class, we derive a system:
$$
\begin{cases}
	u_t + cu_x = v \\
	v_t - cv_x = 0
\end{cases}
$$

### General solution

We can solve for $v$ and then solve for $u$. 

- The second PDE has the following general solution.
  $$
  v(x, t) = h(x + ct),
  $$
  where $h$ is an arbitrary single variable function.

- 

Next, we solve the first inhomogeneous PDE for $u$.

- Substitute our value of $v$ into the PDE.
  $$
  u_t + cu_x = h(x + ct)
  $$
  We first describe one solution of this PDE.

  Let $f(s)$ be a function with the property that its derivative is
  $$
  f's(s) = \frac{h(s)}{2c}.
  $$
  Then we claim that $u_1(x, t) = f(x + ct)$ is one solution of the PDE.

  - $(u_1)_x = f'(x + ct) = \frac{h(x + ct)}{2c}$.

    $(u_1)_t = f'(x + ct)(c) = \frac{h(x + ct)}{2}$.

    Then,
    $$
    \begin{align*}
    	(u_1)_x + c(u_1)_t &= h(x + ct) \\
    	\frac{h(x + ct)}{2c} + \frac{ch(x + ct)}{2} &= h(x + ct),
    \end{align*}
    $$
    so the PDE is satisfied.

  Now we have a specific solution, and can add the solution to the homogeneous PDE to get a general solution set.

  General solution of the PDE $u_t + cu_x = 0$ is, as we know,
  $$
  u(x, t) = g(x - ct),
  $$
  where $g$ is an arbitrary single-variable function.

  Then, the general solution of the original PDE, which is the *wave equation*, becomes,
  $$
  u(x, t) = f(x + ct) + g(x - ct),
  $$
  where $f$ and $g$ are arbitrary single-variable functions.

### Physical understanding 

We say that $u(x, t) = (\text{wave traveling left}) + (\text{wave traveling right})$.

- $c$ represents the wave speed. 
- Say you pull an arbitrary part of this infinite string and let go. It will lead two smaller waves propagating left and right. 

### Initial value example

Consider the initial value problem,
$$
u_{tt} = c^2 u_{xx} \qquad (-\infty < x < \infty)
$$
when $u(x, 0) = \phi(t)$ and $u_t(x, 0) = \psi(t)$.

We would like to give the solution $u(x, t)$ in terms of these initial value condition functions $\phi$ and $\psi$. Since $u$ solves the wave equation, we know that $u(x, t)$ takes the form $f(x + ct) + g(x - ct)$. In other words, we'd like to solve for $f$ and $g$ in terms of $\phi$ and $\psi$.

- We know $u(x, 0) = \phi(x)$.
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  	u(x, 0) &= f(x) + g(x) \\
  	f(x) + g(x) &= \phi(x)
  \end{align*}
  $$

- We know $u_t(x, t) = c f'(x + ct) - c g'(x - ct)$.
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  	u_t(x, 0) &= \psi(x) \\
  	\psi(x) &= c f'(x + ct) - c g'(x - ct)
  \end{align*}
  $$

- So now we have this system:
  $$
  \begin{cases}
  	\phi(x) = f(x) + g(x) \\
  	\psi(x) = cf'(x + ct) - cg'(x - ct)
  \end{cases}
  $$

- 

Now we get to solving:
$$
\begin{align*}
	f'(x) - g'(x) &= \frac{1}{c} \psi(x) \\
	\int_{0}^{x} [f'(s) - g'(s)] ds 
		&= \int_{0}^{x} \frac{1}{c} \psi(s) ds \\
    f(x) - g(x) - (f(0) - g(0)) 
    	&= \frac{1}{c} \int_{0}^{s} \psi(s) ds \\
    f(x) - g(x) 
    	&= A + \frac{1}{c} \int_{0}^{s} \psi(s) ds
    	&[A = f(0) - g(0)] \\
\end{align*}
$$
Add this to the first equation with $\phi$:
$$
\begin{align*}
	 f(x) - g(x) 
    	&= A + \frac{1}{c} \int_{0}^{s} \psi(s) ds \\
    f(x) + g(x) 
    	&= \phi(x) \\
    f(x) 
    	&= \phi(x) + A + \frac{1}{c} \int_{0}^{s} \psi(s) ds \\
    -2 g(x) 
    	&= [A + \frac{1}{c} \int_{0}^{s} \psi(s) ds] - \phi(x) \\
    g(x) &= \frac{1}{2} \phi(x) - \frac{1}{2c} \int_{0}^{s} \psi(s) ds - \frac{A}{2}
\end{align*}
$$
Now we plug back into general solution,
$$
\begin{align*}
	u(x, t)
    	&= f(x + ct) + g(x + ct) \\
    	
    u(x, t)
    	&= \frac{1}{2} [\phi(x + ct) + \phi(x - ct)] + \frac{1}{2c} \int_{x - ct}^{x + ct} \psi(s) ds
\end{align*}
$$
This solution is called **d'Alembert's solution** to the wave equation. (1746)
