# math462; 02.12.2025

## Boundary conditions (3 types)

### Types of BCs

We'll often consider a 1D thing, like vibrating strings and thing metal rod with a position limit on the left and right sides.

We may also consider 2D things, like a thin metal plate or vibrating drumhead.

*Three main types:*

1. **Dirichlet conditions** specify values of for the function $u$ on the boundary.

   For example, something like $u(0, t) = 0$ and $u(l, t) = 0$ for all $t$.

2. **Neumann conditions** specify values for the function $u_x$ on the boundary.

   For example, $u_x(0, t) = 0$ and $u(l, t) = 0$ for all $t$.

   More generally, the *normal* directional derivative.

3. **Robin conditions** specify values for the expression $u_x + au$, where $a$ is some constant.

   For example, $u_x (0, t) - u(0, t) = 0$ and $u_x(l,t) + 2u(l, t) = 0$.

A condition is **homogeneous** because the values specified were $0$. All the above conditions were homogeneous. If non-zero, they're **inhomogeneous**.

We can consider the same PDE with different types of boundary conditions (BCs).

### Heat equation examples

Recall the heat equation $u_t = ku_{xx}$ for a rod $0 < x < l$.

- If the endpoints of a rod are in an ice bath, we have that the endpoints are constant temperature of $0$ degrees.

  From this we get the following *Dirichlet BCs*:
  $$
  u(0, t) = 0 \qquad u(l, t) = 0
  $$

- A rod that is perfectly insulated at the endpoints satisfies the following homogeneous *Neumann BCs*:
  $$
  u_x(0, t) = 0 \qquad u_x(l, t) = 0
  $$
  Recall that the rate of diffusion/heat is proportional to $u_x$. So forcing $u_x$ to be zero implies that the diffusion at points $0$ and $l$ to be zero; the rod is insulated.

- Situation when heat is exchanged with an outside reservoir according to Newton's Law of Cooling can be modeled with a *Robin BC*:
  $$
  u_x(l, t) = -a [u(l, t) - g(t)],
  $$
  where $u_x$ is proportional to the rate of heat flow through the right endpoint and $g(t)$ is the temperature of the reservoir with respect to time.

### Wave equation examples

Recall the wave equation $u_{tt} = c^2 u_{xx}$ for a string $0 < x < l$.

- If the string is held fixed at the endpoints, we have the following homogeneous *Dirichlet BCs*:
  $$
  u(0, t) = 0 \qquad u(l, t) = 0
  $$
  Changing them to be inhomogeneous constants (that are different) could represent a slanted string. Changing them to functions of $t$ would mean that the endpoints heights themselves change with time. 

- If the string has no tension at the endpoints, recall that $u_x$ is proportional to the vertical component of the tension force, then we get the following *Neumann BCs*:
  $$
  u_x(0, t) = 0 \qquad u_x(l, t) = 0
  $$
  $u_x = 0$ means no tension at that point and time.

- Use *Robin BCs* to represent the string being held by springs on both sides, such that the string can move at endpoints but the spring restricts the movement and range.

## Chapter 2; Waves and diffusions

### 2.1; The wave equation (along the real line)

For $u(x, t)$, we will consider the PDE,
$$
u_{tt} = c^2 u_{xx} \qquad (-\infty < x < \infty),
$$
or an "infinite string."

But first, let's take a closer look at the **transport equation**:
$$
u_t + c u_x = 0,
$$
recall the pollutant in a flowing fluid which didn't diffuse. The general solution for this equation (first-order homogeneous PDE) is
$$
u(x, t) = f(x - ct),
$$
where $f$ is an arbitrary single-variable function.

Note that $u(x, 0) = f(x)$, so $f$ is quite literally the initial condition. For a nonzero $t$, we have the graph of $f(x)$ shifted to the right by $ct$.

For the wave equation, we can rewrite as follows,
$$
\begin{align*}
	u_{tt} - c^2 u_{xx} &= 0 \\
	\left(\frac{\partial^2}{\partial t^2} - c^2 \frac{\partial d^2}{\partial x^2}\right) u &= 0 \\
	\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial t} - c \frac{\partial d}{\partial x}\right) \left(\frac{\partial}{\partial t} + c \frac{\partial d}{\partial x}\right) u &= 0 \\
	\text{Let } v &= u_t + cu_x \\
	\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial t} - c \frac{\partial d}{\partial x}\right) v &= 0 \\
	v_t - c u_x &= 0
\end{align*}
$$
Then we get a system of "transport" equations:
$$
\begin{cases}
	v_t - c v_x = 0 \\
	u_t + cu_x = v
\end{cases}
$$
First one is homogeneous and the second one is inhomogeneous.