# math462; 02.01.2025

## Physical derivations, cont'd

### Wave equation

Suppose we have a string which undergoes a relatively small transverse (up-down) vibrations (like a guitar string when plucked).

At a point $x$ on the string and time $t$, let $u(x, t)$ represent the vertical displacement from equilibrium at time $t$.

*Handwaving/assumptions:*

1. Assume the movement is *only* up and down.
2. Displacement is relatively small.
3. Tension on the string is uniform with magnitude $T$.
4. Density of the string is uniform.

Apply Newton's Law $\vec{F} = m \vec{a}$ to the piece of string.

- Acceleration is $a = u_{tt}(x, t)$.

  Let $\rho$ be the density of the string (mass per unit length).

  The mass of the piece of string is then $m = \rho h$, where $h$ is the length of the string.

  The only force acting on the string is tension, by assumption.

  Then force is $m \vec{a} = \rho h u_{tt}$.

One can show that the vertical component of tension can be Taylor approximated by the expression $T u_x$.

- This yields $\vec{F} = T u_x(x + h, t) - Tu_x(x + t)$.

Now we do more math:
$$
\begin{align*}
	\rho h u_{tt} &= T u_x(x + h, t) - Tu_x(x + t) \\
	\rho u_{tt} &= \frac{T u_x(x + h, t) - Tu_x(x + t)}{h} \\
	\text{limit of } &h \rightarrow 0 \\
	\rho u_{tt} &= T u_{xx} \\
	
\end{align*}
$$

### 2d Wave Equation

Suppose we have a flexible drumhead in the shape of domain $D$.

- It vibrates up and down. Let $u(x, y, t)$ be the vertical displacement at position $(x, y)$ and time $t$.

  One can show that $u$ satisfies
  $$
  u_{tt} = c^2 \Delta u = c^2 (u_{xx} + u_{yy})
  $$

### Higher dimension of heat equation

It satisfies $u_t = k \Delta u$.

### Laplace's equation

For either the heat or wave equation, you can consider a *steady state solution* which is independent of time. So $u_t = 0$ and $u_{tt} = 0$.

- Consequently, $\Delta u = 0$ (this is Laplace's equation).

## Initial and boundary conditions

Just a PDE is not enough to describe a specific scenario.

- Specifying some sort of extra condition(s) are typically needed to get a unique solution.

### Initial condition

An **initial condition** specifies the function values at a given initial time $t_0$ (like at time $t_0 = 0$. 

- Example of *heat equation*. $u_t = k u_xx$ where $u(x, 0) = \phi(x)$.