# math462; 02.21.2025

## The diffusion (heat) equation

### Overview

We will study the PDE $u_t = k u_{xx}$, where $k > 0$. We will first solve it "along the entire real line" as we did with the wave equation.

We want to prove a uniqueness result.

### Energy argument

Consider a solution of 
$$
u_t = k u_{xx} \quad \text{for} \quad 0 < x < \ell,\ t > 0
$$
with the Dirichlet BCs and initial condition
$$
u(0, t) = 0, \quad u(\ell, t) = 0, \quad u(x, 0) = \phi(x). 
$$
Then, we define its energy to be
$$
E(t) = \frac{1}{2} \int_{0}^{\ell} u(x, t)^2 \, dx.
$$
From a physics interpretation, it is logical that energy is not conserved. Consider a hot rod plunged into an ice bath.

We'll confirm that energy is not constant, but it is **non-increasing**. That is,
$$
E'(t) < 0.
$$

### Showing $E'(t) < 0$

We start investigating the derivative of our energy expression:
$$
\begin{align*}
	E'(t) 
		&= \frac{\partial}{\partial t} \left[ \frac{1}{2} \int_{0}^{\ell} u(x, t)^2 \, dx \right] \\
		&= \frac{1}{2} \int_0^{\ell} \frac{\partial}{\partial t} [u(x, t)^2] dx \\
		&= \frac{1}{2} \int_{0}^{\ell} 2u \cdot u_t \, dx \\
		&= \int_{0}^{\ell} u u_t \, dx
\end{align*}
$$
Recall, by assumption, $u$ is a solution to the diffusion equation, so
$$
\begin{align*}
	E'(t) &= k \int_{0}^{\ell} u u_{xx} \, dx.
\end{align*}
$$
We can then use integration by parts:
$$
\begin{align*}
	E'(t) 
		&= k \int_0^\ell \left( \frac{\partial }{\partial x} [uu_x] -u^2 \right) dx \\
		&= k[uu_x]_{t=0}^{t = \ell} - \int_0^\ell u^2 \, dx 
			&u^2 \geq 0\\
		&\leq k[u(x, \ell) u_x(x, \ell) - u(x, 0) u_x(x, 0)] \\
		&= 0, &\text{by BCs}
\end{align*}
$$
as needed!

In particular, we have
$$
2 E(t) \leq 2E(0),
$$
and as a result,
$$
\int_{0}^{\ell} u(x, t)^2 \, dx \leq \int_{0}^{\ell} \phi(x)^2 dx,
	\qquad \forall t.
$$

### Inhomogeneous heat equation

We will use the above result to prove that the solution to the inhomogeneous diffusion equation, below, is **unique** (if it exists):
$$
u_t - k u_{xx} = f(x, t), \quad 0 < x < \ell,\, t > 0.
$$
We will apply conditions which are slightly different:
$$
u(x, 0) = \phi(x), \quad u(0, t) = g(t), \quad u(\ell, t) = h(t).
$$
We prove the uniqueness property below.

- Suppose two solutions $u_1(x, t)$ and $u_2(x, t)$ to the above PDE with above conditions exist.

  Let $v(x, t) = u_1(x, t) - u_2(x, t)$. Then we claim,

  - $v_t - kv_{xx} = 0$. (Two solutions to same inhomogeneous PDE.)
  - $v(x, 0) = 0$. (Same initial condition: $\phi(x) - \phi(x) = 0$.)
  - $v(0, t) = v(\ell, t) = 0$. (Same BCs so difference of zero.) 

  So $v$ is identical to the originally posed PDE with identical conditions. Thus,
  $$
  E(t) \leq E(0) = \frac{1}{2} \int_0^{\ell} v(x, 0)^2 = 0.
  $$

  - This follows since we have $u(x, 0) = 0$ as shown above.

  This implies, $E(t) = 0$ for all $t$, since energy cannot be negative both physically and by the mathematical definition we gave it. So,
  $$
  E(t) = \int_{0}^{\ell} v(x, t)^2 \, dx = 0,
  $$
  so $v(x, t) = 0$ since $E(t) \geq 0$ by definition.

  This can only be if $u_1 = u_2$, as needed! So exactly (if any) one unique solution exists to the inhomogeneous PDE with defined boundary conditions.

### Maximum principle

If $u(x, t)$ satisfies $u_t = k u_{xx}$ in a rectangle in the $xt$-plane (over, say, $0 \leq x \leq l$ and $0 \leq t \leq T$), then the maximum value of $u(x, t)$ is either attained:

- Initially, i.e. at $t = 0$. (Bottom side of the $xt$ rectangle.)
- Or on the lateral sides, i.e. when $x = 0$ or $x = \ell$. (Left/right sides.)

Note we have assumed nothing about boundary conditions.

The proof is a little technical, but an insightful observation:

- Suppose there was a local maximum on the interior at the point $(x_0, t_0)$.

  Then this is a critical point, so $u_t(x_0, t_0) = u_x(x_0, t_0) = 0$.

  Local maximum, visually, is concave down.

  - At a local max, one then expects $u_{xx} < 0$.

    But we have $u_{xx} = k u_t = 0$.

    This feels like an obvious contradiction.

  But you *can* have $u_{xx} = 0$ at a local max. (Interesting edge case.)

  So the proof gets a bit more confusing to address such a case.

Since $u$ solves the homogeneous heat PDE, so does $-u$. Thus $-u$ satisfies the maximum principle over the same $xt$-rectangle, and we can then find that $u$ satisfies a similar principle for minimum values.

The maximum principle can be used to prove uniqueness of the solution to
$$
u_t - k u_{xx} = f(x, t),
$$
with the same boundary conditions as we had when proving uniqueness using energy previously.