# math462; 03.14.2025

## Separation of variables

### Goal

Given the heat PDE
$$
u_t = k u_{xx} \qquad (0 < x < \ell,\ t > 0),
$$
with initial condition
$$
u(x, 0) = \phi(x)
$$
and boundary conditions
$$
u(0, t) = 0, \qquad u(\ell, t) = 0.
$$
We want to find solutions of the form
$$
u(x, t) = T(t) X(x).
$$

### Approach

Assuming that form, we find that
$$
u_t = T'(t) X(x), \qquad u_{xx} = T(t) X''(x).
$$
Plugging into PDE, we have
$$
\begin{align*}
	u_t &= k u_{xx} \\
	T'(t) X(x) &= k T(t) X''(x) \\
	\frac{T'(t)}{k T(t)} &= \frac{X''(x)}{X(x)}.
\end{align*}
$$
Both sides are constant with respect to the other variable, and therefore both sides are constant. We pick a constant $\lambda$ such that
$$
\frac{T'(t)}{k T(t)} = \frac{X''(x)}{X(x)} = -\lambda.
$$
Now we have two ODEs. Some algebra gets us to the following:
$$
\begin{align*}
	T' + k \lambda T &= 0, \\
	X'' + \lambda X &= 0.
\end{align*}
$$
Very nice ODEs, hooray!

### Brief ODEs review

**First order.** $y' - ay = 0$ has solutions of the form
$$
y(t) = Ce^{at},
$$
where $C$ is an arbitrary constant.

**2nd order (linear homogeneous, constant coefficients).**

- A bit more complicated.

  These equations look like $ay'' + by' + cy = 0$.

  Look for $e^{\text{something}}$ solutions.

  Let $y = e^{rt}$. Then,

  - $y' = r e^{rt}$.
  - $y'' = r^2 e^{rt}$.

  Then, $ar^2 e^{rt} + br e^{rt} + c e^{rt} = 0$.

  You can solve $(ar^2 + br + c) e^{rt} = 0$.

  This becomes $ar^2 + br + c = 0$. So you can solve for $r$ in terms of the constants $a, b, c$. Outcomes:

  - If the real roots $r_1 \neq r_2$, the solution is $y = C_1 e^{r_1 t} + C_2 e^{r_2 t}$.

  - If both real roots are equal, the solution is $y = C_1 e^{rt} + C_2  t e^{rt}$.

    - Where this second term spawns from is omitted.

  - If two non-real roots $r = a \pm bi$, the solution is
    $$
    y = C_1 e^{at} \cos (bt) + C_2 e^{at} \sin (bt).
    $$

### Return to our problem

We know that our $T$ equation is very easily solvable:
$$
T(t) = A e^{-k \lambda t}.
$$
As for our $X$ equation, our solution form depends on whether $\lambda$ is positive, negative, or zero.

**$\lambda$ is positive.**

- Let $\lambda = \beta^2$ where $\beta > 0$.

  Then our equation becomes $X'' + \beta^2 X = 0$.

  Characteristic equation: $r^2 + \beta^2 = 0$.

  So $r = \pm \beta i$. (Complex.)

  Using our complex case, we then have
  $$
  X(x) = C_1 \cos (\beta x) + C_2 \sin(\beta x).
  $$
  