# math462; 03.26.2025

## Eigen stuff

Let $L$ be a linear operation on functions. If $u$ is a *non-zero function* and $\lambda$ is a scalar such that
$$
L(u) = \lambda u,
$$
then $u$ is called an **eigenfunction** for $L$ with **eigenvalue** $\lambda$.

Our problem $X'' + \lambda X = 0$, $X(0) = 0$, $X(\ell) = 0$, could be viewed as
$$
- \frac{d^2}{dx^2} X = \lambda X, \quad X(0) = 0, \quad X(\ell) = 0.
$$
Thus, the functions $X_n(x) = \sin(\frac{n \pi}{2} x)$ are **eigenfunctions** of $L = -\frac{d^2}{dx^2}$ which have the respective **eigenvalues** $\lambda_n = (\frac{n \pi}{\ell})^2$.

This is called an **eigenvalue problem**.

## Neumann condition

### Problem statement

- **PDE:** $u_t = k u_{xx}$ over $0 < x < \ell$ and $t > 0$.
- **BCs:** $u_x(0, t) = 0$ and $u_x(\ell, t) = 0$.
  - Physically, heat cannot escape the system.
- **IC:** $u(x, 0) = \phi(x)$.

### Separation of variables

We want functions of the form $u(x, t) = T(t) X(x)$.

Works the same as last time, at least at the beginning. You get
$$
\frac{T'}{kT} = \frac{X''}{X} = -\lambda.
$$
This resolves to the two ODEs:
$$
\begin{align*}
	T' + k \lambda T &= 0, \\
	X'' + \lambda X &= 0.
\end{align*}
$$
The BC says that $u_x (0, t) = u_x(\ell, t) = 0$ for all $t$.

- Thus, $T(t) X'(0) = 0$ for all $t$. So $X'(0) = 0$.
- Same with other BC: $X'(\ell) = 0$.

We now have an *eigenvalue problem*:
$$
X'' + \lambda X = 0, \quad X'(0) = 0, \quad X'(\ell) = 0.
$$
We approach by cases, like last time:

- **What if $\lambda = 0$?**

  - Then $X'' = 0$. So $X(x) = Ax + B$.

    $X'(x) = A$. To satisfy BCs, $X'(0) = X'(\ell) = A = 0$.

    As such, $X(x)$ = $B$. (Constant function.)

    $\lambda_0 = 0$ is a *eigenvalue* and $X_0(x) = 1$ is an *eigenfunction*.

- **What if $\lambda = 0$?**

  - We let $\lambda = \beta^2$ where $\beta > 0$.

    Then $X'' + \beta^2 X = 0$, $X'(0) = 0$, $X'(\ell) = 0$.

    General solution says $X(x) = A \cos (\beta x) + B \sin (\beta x)$.

    Then, $X'(x) = -A \beta \sin( \beta x) + B \beta \cos (\beta x)$.

    We now try to satisfy BCs.

    $X'(0) = B \beta = 0$. $\beta$ is non-zero by definition, so $B = 0$.

    Now we have $X'(x) = -A \beta \sin(\beta x)$.

    $X'(\ell) = -A \beta \sin(\beta \ell) = 0$.

    Divide by $-\beta$, as it is non-zero: $A \sin (\beta \ell) = 0$.

    - If $A = 0$, then boring! Implies that $X = 0$ and $u = 0$.

      If $\sin (\beta \ell) = 0$,

      - $\beta \ell = n \pi$ for $n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$

        Then, $\beta = \frac{n \pi}{\ell}$.

We see that $\lambda_n = \beta^2 = (\frac{n \pi}{\ell})^2$ are the **eigenvalues** with the eigenfunctions
$$
X_n(x) = \cos \left(\frac{n \pi}{\ell} x \right).
$$
Also recall we found $\lambda_0 = 0$ where $X_0(x) = 1$. (From the $\lambda = 0$ case.)

Now we solve our equation for $T$ given this:

- Recall $T' + k \lambda T = 0$.

  Substituting $\lambda = (\frac{n \pi}{\ell})^2$ and solving...
  $$
  T(t) = A e^{-(\frac{n \pi}{\ell})^2 k t}.
  $$

We can then form a series solution:
$$
u(x, t) = \frac{1}{2} A_0 + \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n e^{-(\frac{n \pi}{\ell})^2 kt} \cos \left(\frac{n \pi}{\ell} x \right).
$$
This turns out to be the general solution to our heat PDE with the two Neumann boundary conditions!

### Specific solution from IC

If we add our initial condition, $u(x, 0) = \phi(x)$, then we find RHS simplifies a bit:
$$
\phi(x) = u(x, 0) = \frac{1}{2} A_0 + 
	\sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n \cos \left( \frac{n \pi}{\ell} \right).
$$
This is a **Fourier cosine series**. 

Problem for another time: *how can we write a function $\phi$ as a Fourier series, to solve for $A_n$?* 

### Example

We have the problem:

- $u_t = \frac{1}{2} u_{xx}$.
- $u(0, t) = 0$ and $u(2 \pi, t) = 0$.
- $u(x, 0) = 3 + \cos x - \frac{1}{2} \cos (2x)$.

Substitute into the general solution:
$$
u(x, t) = \frac{1}{2} A_0 + \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n e^{- (\frac{n \pi}{2 \pi})^2 (\frac{1}{2}) t} \cos \left(\frac{n \pi}{2 \pi} x \right).
$$
Simplifying,
$$
u(x, t) = \frac{1}{2} A_0 + \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n e^{\frac{n^2}{8} t} \cos \left(\frac{n}{2} x \right).
$$
Substituting our IC,
$$
u(x, 0) = \frac{1}{2} A_0 + \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n \cos \left( \frac{n}{2} x \right).
$$
We see that $A_0 = 6$, $A_2 = 1$, $A_4 = -\frac{1}{2}$ and all other coefficients are zero. So our specific solution becomes
$$
u(x, t) = 3 + \cos (x) + -\frac{1}{2} \cos(2x).
$$



