# math462; 04.07.2025

## Last class

We introduced the **inner product** of functions $f$ and $g$ defined over $0 \dots \ell$:
$$
(f, g) = \int_{0}^{\ell} f(x) g(x) dx.
$$
Also, a bunch of its properties:

For the family of eigenfunctions
$$
X_n(x) = \sin \left( \frac{n \pi}{\ell} x \right),
$$
we saw that for any two $n$ and $m$ where $n \neq m$,
$$
(X_n, X_m) = 0.
$$
For the inner product of one of the eigenfunctions with itself,
$$
(X_n, X_n) = \frac{\ell}{2}.
$$

## Inner product; sine series

### Finding constants (sine series)

Suppose we can write $\phi(x)$ as a Fourier sine series
$$
\phi(x) = \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n \sin \left(\frac{n \pi}{\ell} \right) 
	= \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n X_n(x).
$$
Take the inner product of both sides with the function $X_m$ (for some $m$):
$$
\begin{align*}
(\phi, X_m) &= (\sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n X_n, X_m) 
	= \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} (A_n X_n, X_m) \\
	&= \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} A_n (X_n, X_m) = A_m (X_m, X_m) \\
	&= (A_m) \frac{\ell}{2}.
\end{align*}
$$
Then we have an expression for the constant $A_m$:
$$
A_m = \frac{(\phi, X_m)}{\frac{\ell}{2}} 
	= \boxed{\frac{2}{\ell} \int_{0}^{\ell} \phi(x) \sin \left( \frac{m \pi x}{\ell} \right) dx} \, .
$$
If we can write $\phi$ as a Fourier sine series, then we can derive any one of the constants $A_m$ using the above formula.

### Examples with this

Find the Fourier sine series of the constant function $\phi(x) = 1$ on $0 < x < \ell$. Using the above formula,
$$
A_n = \frac{2}{\ell} \int_0^\ell \sin \left(\frac{m \pi x}{\ell} \right) dx.
$$
Taking the anti-derivative,
$$
A_n = -\left[\frac{2}{m \pi} \cos \left(\frac{n \pi x}{\ell}\right) \right]^{x = \ell}_{x = 0} = -\frac{2}{n \pi} [(-1)^n - 1].
$$
The $(-1)^n$ represents that the cosine (being $-1$ or $1$) varies depending on the parity of $n$. Perhaps it is then simpler to expand the expression in each case and find a piecewise result:
$$
A_n = \begin{cases}
	0, &\text{if $n$ is even},\\
	\frac{4}{n \pi}, &\text{if $n$ is odd}.
\end{cases}
$$
Substituting back into the sine series and doing some re-indexing (to remove the zeroed even $n$-coefficients), we find that 
$$
\frac{4}{\pi} \sum_{n = 0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{2n + 1} \sin \left( \frac{(2n + 1)\pi}{\ell} x \right) = 1.
$$
Consider the heat equation, homogeneous Dirichlet BCs, and an IC of $u(x, 0) = 1$.

Then we can substitute our discovered sine series for $1$ into the infinite series expression for the heat equation with homogeneous Dirichlet BCs:
$$
u(x, t) = \frac{4}{\pi} \sum_{m = 0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{2m + 1} 
	e^{-(\frac{(2m + 1)\pi}{\ell})^2 kt} \sin \left( \frac{(2m + 1) \pi}{\ell} x \right).
$$
Consider the wave equation, with homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions, and initial conditions of $u(x, 0) = 0$ and $u_t(x, 0) = 1$. Recall the general series solution:
$$
u(x, t) = \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} \left[A_n \cos \left(\frac{n \pi ct}{\ell} \right) + B_n \sin \left(\frac{n \pi ct}{\ell} \right) \right] \sin \left(\frac{n \pi x}{\ell} \right).
$$
For the IC $u(x, 0) = 0$, all the $B_n \sin \dots$ terms go to $0$, so $A_n$ is $0$ for all $n$.

Now consider $u_t$ (ignoring the $A_n$ terms as they are all zero):
$$
u_t(x, t) = \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} B_n \frac{n \pi c}{\ell} \cos \left(\frac{n \pi ct}{\ell} \right) \sin \left(\frac{n \pi x}{\ell} \right).
$$
For $u_t(x, 0)$, the cosine terms become $1$:
$$
u_t(x, 0) = \sum_{n = 1}^{\infty} B_n \frac{n \pi c}{\ell} \sin \left(\frac{n \pi x}{\ell} \right).
$$
Now, we know this expression must equal $1$, which gives us a hint as to the value of
$$
B_n \frac{n \pi c}{\ell} = \begin{cases}
	0, &\text{if $n$ is even},\\
	\frac{4}{n \pi}, &\text{if $n$ is odd}.
\end{cases}
$$
In the even case, we see the entire term must be zero, so $B_n = 0$. In the odd case, we find
$$
B_n = \frac{\ell}{n \pi c} \cdot \frac{4}{n \pi} = \frac{4 \ell}{n^2 \pi^2 c}.
$$
Now, we substitute back into the general solution:
$$
u(x, t) = \sum_{m = 0}^{\infty} \frac{(2m + 1)^2 \pi^2 c}{4 \ell} \sin \left(\frac{(2m + 1) \pi ct}{\ell} \right)  \sin \left(\frac{(2m + 1) \pi x}{\ell} \right).
$$

## Cosine series (Neumann BCs)

### Fourier cosine series

For Neumann problem, our Eigenfunctions are
$$
X_0(x) = 1, \qquad X_n(x) = \cos \left( \frac{n \pi}{\ell} x \right).
$$
The motivation for this comes from the Neumann boundary conditions. Once again, we use orthogonality to find the inner products of any two eigenvalues. We find:
$$
(X_n, X_m) = \begin{cases}
	0 &\text{if $n \neq m$}, \\
	\frac{\ell}{2} &\text{if $n = m = 1, 2, 3, \dots$}, \\
	(X_0, X_0) = \ell &\text{if $n = m = 0$}.
\end{cases}
$$